Spatiotemporal Learning of Brain Dynamics from
fMRI Using Frequency-Specific Multi-Band
Attention for Cognitive and Psychiatric
Applications
Sangyoon Bae1, Junbeom Kwon2, Shinjae Yoo3, Jiook Cha1,4,5*
1Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National
University, Gwanak-ro 1, Seoul, 08826, Seoul, South Korea.
2Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Dean
Keeton Street, Austin, 78712, Texas, United States.
3Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Brookhaven Avenue, Shirley, 11967, NewYork, United States.
4Department of Psychology, Seoul National University, Gwanak-ro 1,
Seoul, 08826, Seoul, South Korea.
5Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National
University, Gwanak-ro 1, Seoul, 08826, Seoul, South Korea.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): connectome@snu.ac.kr;
Contributing authors: stellasybae@snu.ac.kr;
Abstract
Understanding how the brain’s complex nonlinear dynamics give rise to cogni-
tive function remains a central challenge in neuroscience. While brain functional
dynamics exhibits scale-free and multifractal properties across temporal scales,
conventional neuroimaging analytics assume linearity and stationarity, failing
to capture frequency-specific neural computations. Here, we introduce Multi-
Band Brain Net (MBBN), the first transformer-based framework to explicitly
model frequency-specific spatiotemporal brain dynamics from fMRI. MBBN
integrates biologically-grounded frequency decomposition with multi-band self-
attention mechanisms, enabling discovery of previously undetectable frequency-
dependent network interactions. Trained on 49,673 individuals across three
large-scale cohorts (UK Biobank, ABCD, ABIDE), MBBN sets a new state-
of-the-art in predicting psychiatric and cognitive outcomes (depression, ADHD,
1ASD), showing particular strength in classification tasks with up to 41.36%
higher AUROC and provides a novel framework for predicting cognitive intel-
ligence scores. Frequency-resolved analyses uncover disorder-specific signatures:
in ADHD, high-frequency fronto-sensorimotor connectivity is attenuated and
opercular somatosensory nodes emerge as dynamic hubs; in ASD, orbitofrontal-
somatosensory circuits show focal high-frequency disruption together with
enhanced ultra-low-frequency coupling between the temporo-parietal junction
and prefrontal cortex. By integrating scale-aware neural dynamics with deep
learning, MBBN delivers more accurate and interpretable biomarkers, open-
ing avenues for developing more precise psychiatric biomarkers and advancing
developmental neuroscience.
Keywords: Spatiotemporal learning, Transformer, fMRI, Knowledge-guided Deep
Neural Network, Neural Dynamics
1 Introduction
Understanding the brain’s dynamic processes is essential for unraveling the mecha-
nisms underlying adaptive cognition and behavior. These processes influence critical
functions such as learning, decision-making, and social interactions, with mounting
evidence that their dysregulation is closely linked to mental health conditions ([1–
4]). While functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been instrumental in
probing brain activity, many conventional analytical methods remain constrained by
assumptions of linearity, stationarity and static connectivity. Approaches ranging from
mass-univariate statistical tests and seed-based correlations to static functional con-
nectivity maps often treat the brain as a relatively fixed system, thus failing to capture
the temporal fluctuations, nonlinear interactions, and adaptive reconfigurations that
characterize real neural dynamics. Recent advances in artificial intelligence, partic-
ularly transformer-based architectures originally designed for sequential data, have
shown promise for modeling brain activity as a continuously evolving network of inter-
dependent processes. Yet, these approaches largely ignore the frequency-specific nature
of neural oscillations ([5–8]).
This oversight is particularly problematic given that existing neuroimaging mod-
els, including recent deep learning approaches, treat brain signals as broadband
phenomena, overlooking the fundamental frequency-specific organization of neural
computation. Indeed, this organization is best understood through two fundamental
properties that describe the brain’s complexity: its multifractal structure and its
scale-free dynamics .
Multifractality, a key structural property, points to the brain’s nested, hierarchi-
cal organization where multiple scaling dimensions and power-law behaviors coexist
([9–13]). Crucially, it is within this complex structure that scale-free dynamics—a
key functional property—become apparent. While a broadband signal is not inher-
ently scale-free, decomposing it into distinct frequency components reveals power-law
relationships (Equation 1) that signify consistent activity patterns across different
timescales. These dynamics play crucial roles in brain maturation and state transitions,
2with temporal variability serving as a key regulatory mechanism ([14, 15]). The power-
law exponent ( β) varies across brain regions and states, providing valuable insights
into neural network heterogeneity and serving as a potential marker for neurological
and psychiatric disorders ([16, 17]). Evidence from fMRI, ECoG, and EEG studies
further suggests that these principles drive frequency-specific changes in connectiv-
ity and topological organization, such as small-worldness and modularity ([18, 19]).
Understanding these patterns is crucial for developing more effective diagnostic and
therapeutic strategies.
To address these challenges, we introduce Multi-Band Brain Net (MBBN) , the
first transformer-based framework specifically designed to model frequency-resolved
spatiotemporal brain dynamics from fMRI. Unlike existing approaches that ana-
lyze broadband signals, MBBN explicitly decomposes neural activity into biologically
meaningful frequency bands using scale-free principles, then applies specialized atten-
tion mechanisms to capture frequency-specific connectivity patterns incorporating
network theory concepts like communicability (Figure 1, 4). MBBN divides fMRI
BOLD signals into distinct frequency bands, enabling the capture of band-specific
functional and topological properties. This approach provides a neurobiologically
informed framework for modeling the brain’s multifractal and scale-free dynamics.
The model features two key strengths: Firstly, its self-attention weighted connectivity
dynamically models functional connectivity by capturing complex, nonlinear inter-
actions and time-varying relationships between brain regions, thereby overcoming the
limitations of traditional static, correlation-based linear representations . Sec-
ondly, a communicability-inspired pretraining loss function optimizes for biologically
meaningful connectivity patterns. By leveraging these advances, MBBN not only pro-
vides deeper insights into brain function but also identifies frequency-specific markers
for neurological and psychiatric disorders, offering a powerful new tool for clinical
neuroscience research and applications.
log(power )∝ −β·log(frequency ) (1)
3timelengt htimelengt h
transposetimelengt h[CLS]
t ok en[CLS]
t ok en
A tt ention 
MatricesNumber of 
A tt ention 
Heads]ROI
timelengt hTimeseries in
high
fr equency rangeTimeseries in
lo w
fr equency rangeTimeseries in
ultralo w
fr equency rangeROIROIROIBERT
MBBN
Module [high]Divfr eqBERTMBBN
Module [lo w]MBBN
Module [ultralo w]Multi Head 
A tt ention......A
B
CA v eraged
A tt ention 
Matrix
[high]A v eraged
A tt ention 
Matrix
[lo w]A v eraged
A tt ention 
Matrix
[ultralo w]T empor al Module
Spatial ModuleFig. 1 Multi-Band Brain Net procedure
A.The MBBN module processes each timeseries signal, divided by frequency, within specific fre-
quency ranges. In the temporal module (denoted as BERT), BERT updates the [CLS (Classification)]
token, which is then passed through a classifier to generate a prediction ˆ yν(νrepresents the fre-
quency range). The spatial module employs a multi-head attention mechanism to compute attention
matrices representing the interactions between regions of interest (ROIs). B.The MBBN modules
are applied to timeseries signals across three frequency ranges (ultra-low, low, and high frequency).
Parameter sharing is implemented in the temporal module, while spatial modules have independent
parameters for each frequency range. The final output of MBBN is computed as the average of the pre-
dictions across all frequency ranges, along with attention matrices specific to each frequency range. C.
Frequency decomposition using scale-free principles on representative UKB data. Individual-specific
knee frequencies ( f1,f2) separate three biologically distinct bands: high (pink), low (yellow), and
ultralow (yellow-green) frequencies, each exhibiting characteristic power-law scaling. The dotted red
and green lines indicate the frequency boundaries: ultra-low to low ( f1), and low to high ( f2) fre-
quencies, respectively.42 Results
2.1 Experimental Setup and Downstream Tasks
To rigorously evaluate the performance and generalizability of MBBN, we designed
a diverse set of predictive tasks spanning biological, cognitive, and clinical domains
across three large-scale cohorts (UKB, ABCD, and ABIDE).
The tasks were defined as follows. For biological phenotypes, we performed sex
classification. For cognitive function, we predicted Fluid Intelligence scores derived
from the NIH Toolbox. In the clinical domain, we predicted a variety of psychiatric
outcomes: (1) depression diagnosis in the ABCD dataset (classification), (2) Patient
Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) depression scores in the UKB dataset (regression),
(3) ADHD diagnosis based on a Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) T-score exceeding
65 in the ABCD dataset (classification), and (4) Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
diagnosis in the ABIDE dataset (classification).
For each downstream task, participants with missing or invalid assessment scores
were excluded from the analysis (listwise exclusion). Model performance was evaluated
using the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC) for all
classification tasks and the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for all regression tasks.
2.2 MBBN demonstrates superior performance across diverse
neuroimaging tasks
Task MBBN vs Best Baseline (%) vs Worst Baseline (%)
ABCD Sex 0.916 (AUROC) +2.346 (**) +19.271 (***)
ABCD Fluid Intelligence 0.717 (MAE) +0.693 +9.584 (***)
ABCD Depression 0.556 (AUROC) +1.460 +7.961
UKB Sex 0.980 (AUROC) +3.158 (*) +14.086 (***)
UKB Fluid Intelligence 1.630 (MAE) -3.099 (*) -1.305 (*)
UKB Depression 2.21 (MAE) -1.231 (*) +0.924 (**)
ABCD ADHD 0.645 (AUROC) +4.032 +12.174 (**)
ABIDE ASD 0.810 (AUROC) +16.212 +41.361 (*)
Table 1 Performance gain of MBBN between best and worst baseline model. We illustrated
finetuned MBBN for comparison of ABCD ADHD classification and ABIDE ASD classification.
Statistical significance against baseline models was determined by a paired t-test (* p <0.05, ** p <0.01,
***p <0.001).
To evaluate its performance, MBBN was trained from scratch on a diverse set
of downstream tasks spanning biological, cognitive, and clinical domains, utilizing
both the HCP-MMP1 and Schaefer atlases with the UKB and ABCD datasets. While
MBBN demonstrated unparalleled performance in classification tasks, its advantage
in regression tasks (e.g., fluid intelligence and depression score prediction) was less
pronounced, suggesting that the model’s architecture is particularly optimized for
distinguishing categorical phenotypes rather than predicting continuous scores. The
5ABC
D
GHEFFig. 2 Comparative Analysis of fMRI Prediction Models. Across datasets and tasks, the
proposed MBBN demonstrates superior predictive performance compared to baseline models includ-
ing state-of-the-art models in the field (e.g., Brain Network Transformer ([5])), as well as vanilla
BERT (without multifractal decomposition). [CC] indicates models based on Pearson’s correlation-
based connectivity; [TD] represents models accounting for temporal dynamics. The x-axis denotes the
models, and the y-axis represents performance metrics, with AUROC used for classification tasks and
MAE for regression tasks. MBBN consistently outperforms baseline models across biological (A-B: sex
prediction), cognitive (C-D: fluid intelligence), and clinical (E-H: depression, ADHD, ASD) predic-
tion tasks. [CC] indicates correlation-based connectivity models; [TD] represents temporal dynamics
models. AUROC is shown for classification tasks, MAE for regression tasks. Data from ABCD (A-
C, G), UKB (D-F), and ABIDE (H) datasets using HCP-MMP1 atlas. A-F denotes from-scratch
experiments and G-H denotes fine-tuning experiments. *** denotes p−value < 0.001, ** denotes
p−value < 0.01, * denotes p−value < 0.05, n.s. denotes not significantly significant.
primary results presented in Figure 2 A-F and Table 1 focus on experiments con-
ducted with the HCP-MMP1 atlas; corresponding analyses using the Schaefer atlas
are detailed in the Supplementary Materials G.1.
6For biological phenotype prediction, MBBN achieved substantial improvements in
sex classification with gains up to 14.09% (UKB) and 19.27% (ABCD) using HCP-
MMP1 atlas. Cognitive assessment showed marked improvements, with fluid intelli-
gence prediction demonstrating up to 9.58% enhancement on ABCD. Also clinical
prediction tasks revealed MBBN’s therapeutic potential, achieving 0.92% improvement
in depression prediction (UKB) and exceptional performance in psychiatric disorders
(detailed in Supplementary Materials G).
2.3 Confound sensitivity and matched re-estimation
Using ABCD, we tested associations between knee frequencies and major confounds.
Sex was associated with f1only (not f2), suggesting a potential sex-linked physio-
logical contribution at lower frequencies, whereas site effects were present for both
knees (expected under 22-site acquisition heterogeneity). By contrast, age and head
motion (mean FD) were not significantly related to either knee. To ensure that disorder
effects were not driven by these factors, we constructed a propensity score–matched
subsample jointly balancing sex, age, motion, and site; covariates were well balanced
(standardized mean differences <0.10). After propensity score matching, AUROC
increased from 0.633 to 0.651; however, the difference did not reach statistical signifi-
cance under our paired comparison ( p= 0.3742). Full association tables and balance
diagnostics are provided in the Supplementary Materials E.
2.4 Communicability-based pretraining enables superior
clinical prediction performance
The exceptional performance of MBBN, particularly in clinical prediction tasks, stems
from our novel communicability-based pretraining strategy that masks nodes with
high communicability within the brain network. This strategy was predicated on the
hypothesis that selectively reconstructing these highly influential nodes during pre-
training would better represent the complex communication patterns within the brain.
To validate this hypothesis and evaluate the downstream impact of this pretraining
strategy, MBBN was subsequently fine-tuned on two clinically relevant classification
tasks: ADHD classification using the ABCD dataset, and ASD classification using the
ABIDE dataset. These datasets and tasks were chosen for their established clinical
significance and high prevalence rates.
Fine-tuning experiments (Figure 2 G-H) revealed a clear advantage for the MBBN-
high model, which employed a pretraining strategy that selectively masked nodes with
high communicability. This approach resulted in significant performance improvements
compared to baselines: a 7.86% gain ( p <0.005) in ADHD classification AUROC and
a 41.36% ( p < 0.05) gain in ASD classification AUROC. In contrast, models using
random node masking ( MBBN-random ) or masking nodes with low communicabil-
ity (MBBN-low ) showed inferior performance, even compared to the MBBN model
trained from scratch ( MBBN-from scratch ). These findings underscore the critical role
of communicability-based pretraining in effectively leveraging the underlying network
structure of the data to enhance predictive performance. Detailed results and statis-
tical details are available in Supplementary Materials G.1. These results demonstrate
7that communicability-based loss better captures a complex information flow of the
brain than conventional masking loss, and MBBN’s frequency-resolved approach cap-
tures clinically relevant neural signatures that are missed by conventional broadband
analysis methods.
2.5 Frequency-specific connectivity patterns reveal distinct
psychiatric biomarkers
To identify the neurobiological features that our model learned to distinguish between
psychiatric and control groups, we applied a Grad-CAM-based attribution analysis.
This method allowed us to extract the specific, frequency-dependent attention pat-
terns that were most influential in the model’s classification decisions. By examining
these discriminative patterns, we uncovered distinct neural signatures for ADHD and
ASD that were not apparent in conventional broadband analyses, thereby validat-
ing that the model had learned clinically relevant information (See Section 3.10 for
details). Figure 3 focuses specifically on ADHD and ASD because these are the repre-
sentative psychiatric disorders for which our model achieved the highest classification
performance, thereby providing a clear and effective demonstration of the model’s
interpretability.
In the ABCD test dataset, we identified significant group differences between
individuals with ADHD and healthy controls (HC) in the model’s learned attention
patterns across frequency bands (Figure 3 A-C). The analysis revealed that the most
extensive alterations occurred in the high-frequency band, accounting for 8.43% of all
significant inter-regional attention differences ( p <0.05). These patterns showed mod-
erate effect sizes (75th percentile Cohen’s d = 0.332). In contrast, the low-frequency
and ultralow-frequency bands exhibited more localized but still significant alterations,
accounting for 3.46% (Cohen’s d 75th percentile = 0.220) and 3.56% (Cohen’s d 75th
percentile = 0.117) of the total discriminative patterns, respectively.
Anatomically, the high-frequency patterns that the model learned to distinguish
ADHD centered on Area 10v (ventral part of Brodmann Area 10), implicating
networks crucial for executive control. The discriminative low-frequency patterns con-
sistently involved Area OP2-3-VS (opercular parts of Areas 2 and 3 and adjacent
Ventral Somatosensory / Sylvian region) and the Auditory 4 Complex, suggesting that
the model leveraged features related to sensorimotor-auditory integration. Finally, the
subtle ultralow-frequency patterns in the Medial Belt Complex and ParaHippocam-
pal regions point to alterations in memory and emotional processing circuits that
contributed to the model’s classification.
In the ABIDE dataset, the model learned a distinct set of discriminative features
for ASD classification, with a contrasting frequency profile (Figure 3 D-F). T-test
comparisons revealed that the most extensive alterations in learned attention weights
were in the ultralow-frequency band, representing 4.54% of all significant patterns with
large effect sizes (75th percentile Cohen’s d = 0.717). Low-frequency alterations were
similarly prominent, accounting for 4.04% of significant patterns with substantial effect
sizes (Cohen’s d 75th percentile = 0.714). Notably, the model found high-frequency
patterns to be the least discriminative, comprising only 1.81% of significant features,
though these still showed moderate effect sizes (Cohen’s d 75th percentile = 0.575).
8AB
CD
E
FAr ea 10v R
Ar ea 10v RAr ea 10v R
Ar ea OP2- 3- VS RAr ea OP2- 3- VS RAr ea OP2- 3- VS R
ParaHippocampal Ar ea 1ParaHippocampal Ar ea 1ParaHippocampal Ar ea 1Ar ea 11l R
Ar ea 11l RAr ea 11l RP olar 10p R
Ar ea T empor oPariet oOccipital Junction 3 LAr ea T empor oPariet oOccipital Junction 3 LP olar 10p RP olar 10p RFig. 3 Frequency-specific connectivity disruptions in ADHD and ASD. Statistically signif-
icant connections (FDR-corrected p <0.05, top 10 effect sizes) distinguishing individuals with ADHD
(A-C) and ASD (D-F) from healthy controls. The primary hub regions for each panel are as follows:
(A) Right ventral Brodmann area 10, (B) Right Parietal Operculum, (C) Parahippocampal gyrus,
(D) Right lateral Brodmann area 11, (E) Right polar Brodmann area 10, and (F) Left Temporo-
Parieto-Occipital Junction. Red indicates increased connectivity in the disorder group, while blue
indicates decreased connectivity. Detailed results are described in the Supplementary Materials.
9The few high-frequency patterns the model used for classification were localized to
Area 11l (lateral part of Brodmann Area 11), consistent with its role in social-cognitive
functions. The prominent low-frequency discriminative features affected Area 10pp
(frontopolar cortex), implicating higher-order executive functions. Most significantly,
theextensive ultralow-frequency attention patterns involved Area TPOJ3
(temporo-parieto-occipital junction) and multiple frontal regions. This indicates that
the model’s classification heavily relied on features related to fundamental disruptions
in social cognition and language networks—core domains of ASD pathophysiology.
In both the ABCD and ABIDE datasets, analysis of false positive and false nega-
tive subjects (based on predicted values) showed no statistically significant connections
in the self-attention-based connectivity analysis. These frequency-resolved patterns
reveal disorder-specific neural signatures: ADHD primarily affects high-frequency
sensorimotor networks with compensatory ultralow-frequency changes, while ASD
shows pervasive low and ultralow-frequency disruptions in social-cognitive circuits.
Importantly, false positive and false negative cases showed no significant connectiv-
ity patterns, confirming the specificity of these frequency-dependent biomarkers for
accurate psychiatric classification.
3 Methods
3.1 Preprocessing
The ABCD, UKB, and ABIDE datasets underwent dataset-specific preprocessing
pipelines to honor the official protocols and best practices established by each respec-
tive consortium. In ABCD, a conservative bandpass filter (0.009-0.08 Hz) was applied
following consortium protocols for adolescent populations ([20]). UKB employed a
broader filter (0.008-0.1 Hz) optimized for adult populations to minimize heart rate
variability effects ([21]). ABIDE used finite impulse response filtering (0.01-0.1 Hz)
specifically designed for multi-site ASD data integration ([22]).
For the present study, additional preprocessing was performed on the resting-state
BOLD data. The following preprocessing procedures were applied to each participant’s
resting-state BOLD data: First, skull-stripping, slice-timing correction, susceptibility
distortion correction, and spatial normalization to MNI space were conducted using
fMRIPrep ([23]). Subsequently, head motion artifacts and signals from white matter
were removed using component-based noise correction (CompCor) ([24]). The mean
time-series signals from predefined regions of interest (ROIs) were extracted using the
Nilearn package, with HCP-MMP1 asymmetric ([25]) and Schaefer 400 ([26]) atlases
employed for ROI definitions. Participants whose data contained voxels with NaN
values, typically arising from the regression of unreliable white-matter signals, were
excluded from the analysis. Additionally, to minimize spurious signal fluctuations due
to scanner instability, the first 20 volumes of each time-series were discarded.
For deep neural network training, uniform sequence lengths across all partici-
pants were required. To standardize the sequence length, it was set to the smallest
multiple of 8 that was greater than or equal to the shortest sequence length in the
dataset, optimizing computational efficiency for GPU-based matrix operations. The
10final sequence lengths for the datasets were as follows: UK Biobank (UKB) 464, Ado-
lescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) 348, and Autism Brain Imaging Data
Exchange (ABIDE) 280.
3.2 Dataset Description and Subject Selection Criteria
This study utilized three large-scale, publicly available datasets: the UK Biobank
(UKB), the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study, and the Autism
Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE). The final sample size for each cohort was
determined following a rigorous quality control and subject selection procedure.
UK Biobank (UKB): The UKB dataset is a prospective cohort study of approx-
imately 500,000 adults. For our study, we included participants who had available
resting-state fMRI data and passed the quality control assessments provided by the
UKB consortium, resulting in a final sample of 41,283 individuals.
Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study: We used the
baseline, year-one data from the ABCD Study, a longitudinal study of brain devel-
opment in U.S. children. The initial release contained imaging data from over 11,000
participants. Our final sample of 8,833 participants was derived after excluding sub-
jects based on several criteria: (1) failure to pass the fMRI quality control protocols
provided by the ABCD consortium (e.g., due to excessive head motion), (2) pres-
ence of incidental neurological findings, and (3) unavailability of relevant behavioral
or diagnostic data for our downstream tasks.
Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE): We used data from the
ABIDE-I cohort, which aggregates resting-state fMRI data from 17 international
acquisition sites. We included all sites to maximize sample size and heterogeneity.
Subjects were excluded if they failed the quality control assessments from the Prepro-
cessed Connectomes Project (PCP) or if their diagnostic information was incomplete.
This resulted in a final sample of 141 participants for the ASD classification task.
Demographic and diagnosis distribution details and neuroimaging parameter infor-
mation for the three datasets (UKB, ABCD, ABIDE) are summarized in Table 2, 3.
The UK Biobank (UKB) dataset, which includes 41,283 participants, was used for
pretraining due to its large sample size and broad demographic representation. This
extensive dataset enabled the model to capture generalizable brain dynamics pat-
terns. The Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) dataset, consisting of
4,527 participants (including individuals with ADHD and healthy controls), and the
Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) dataset, which includes 141 partic-
ipants (comprising individuals with ASD and healthy controls), were employed for
fine-tuning to capture disorder-specific patterns.
ADHD diagnosis was based on CBCL attention and ADHD scores exceeding a
T-score threshold of 65, while healthy controls were defined as individuals with no diag-
nosed mental health disorders ([27]). This classification ensured a distinct separation
between clinical and non-clinical groups, facilitating model training and evaluation.
Our selection of downstream prediction tasks was guided by the prioritization of
well-established phenotypes that ensure large sample sizes, minimal missing data, and
high clinical relevance for classification frameworks.
11For the ABCD dataset, we focused on a binary classification of depression (disorder
vs. controls) rather than regression on continuous symptom scores. This choice was
motivated by the goal of testing the model’s utility in a categorical diagnostic context,
which aligns with common clinical applications and provides a clear, robust target for
classification models.
For the ABIDE dataset, we similarly prioritized the primary diagnostic label (ASD
vs. typically developing controls) over continuous behavioral metrics such as the Social
Responsiveness Scale (SRS) or Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS). This
decision was driven by the need for maximum data standardization and reliability.
The primary diagnosis is the most consistently harmonized variable across the many
different data collection sites within the ABIDE consortium, whereas behavioral scores
can be subject to significant inter-site variability in administration and scoring.
Features UKB ABCD ABIDE
Gender (M/F) 40,699 (21,556/19,143) 8,833 (4,635/4,198) 141 (114/27)
Age (year) 54.9 ±7.5 - 14.3 ±3.6
Age (month) - 119.2 ±7.5 -
Depression (PHQ-9 score) 11.5 ±3.5 - -
Depression (disorder/controls) - 3,113 (2,652/461) -
ADHD (disorder/controls) - 4,289 (2,439/1,850) -
ASD (disorder/controls) - - 141 (77/64)
Table 2 Features of the UKB, ABCD, and ABIDE subjects. Disorder denotes ADHD in
the ABCD dataset and ASD in the ABIDE dataset.
Parameter UKB ABCD ABIDE
Repetition Time (TR, s) 0.735 0.8 Various (1.5 – 3.0)
Echo Time (TE, ms) 39 30 Various
Voxel Size (mm3) 2.4 x 2.4 x 2.4 2.4 x 2.4 x 2.4 Various
Table 3 Key acquisition parameters for each dataset.
3.3 Experimental Settings
To address the imbalance in clinical variables within the dataset, stratified sampling
was employed to ensure balanced distributions of target variables (ADHD, depression,
ASD) across the training, validation, and test sets. A similar approach was used for
the biological phenotype (sex), which showed minimal imbalance. To enhance model
robustness and reduce overfitting, training was conducted using three random seeds,
and the average performance across these runs was reported.
Gradient clipping with a norm of one and gradient accumulation were applied to
stabilize training and improve predictive accuracy. To accelerate the training process,
12Automatic Mixed Precision (AMP) was utilized. The BERT model architecture com-
prised 8 hidden layers and 8 or 12 attention heads, depending on the number of regions
of interest (ROIs) in the atlas used. The number of attention heads was chosen based
on the constraint that it should be a divisor of the total number of ROIs. Hyperpa-
rameter optimization included testing learning rates ([1e-5, 1e-2]), weight decay ([1e-3,
1e-2]), learning rate policy (step, SGDR), and optimizers (Adam, AdamW, RMSprop).
For computational efficiency, pretraining was performed on a single A100 GPU,
while training from scratch and fine-tuning were conducted using a single NVIDIA
RTX 3090 GPU. The number of epochs was set to 100 for training from scratch. Effi-
cient pretraining was achieved by determining the optimal number of epochs using
weightwatcher ([28]), which identifies well-trained layers based on statistical learn-
ing theory. Optimal pretraining epochs were set to 1,000 for the HCP-MMP1 atlas
and 400 for the Schaefer 400 atlas. Additional methodological details are provided in
Supplementary Materials A.2.
3.4 Frequency-resolved decomposition based on scale-free
principles
Brain activity exhibits multifractal properties with distinct scaling behaviors across
frequency ranges, reflecting the hierarchical organization of neural networks from local
circuits to global integration pathways. Conventional broadband connectivity analysis
obscures these frequency-specific dynamics, potentially missing critical neurophys-
iological signatures of psychiatric disorders. To capture these frequency-dependent
neural processes, we developed a systematic two-step fitting procedure to identify phys-
iologically meaningful frequency boundaries (knee frequencies) that demarcate distinct
scaling regimes in the power spectral density of resting-state fMRI signals. Following
frequency decomposition using the identified knee frequencies, we confirmed that each
of the three segments exhibited distinct power-law scaling behavior, as evidenced by
significantly different βvalues across frequency bands ( p <0.001).
3.4.1 Step 1: Ultralow frequency boundary identification using
Lorentzian fitting
We first applied the Lorentzian equation (Equation 2) to the entire power spectral
density to identify f1, the primary knee frequency that separates ultralow frequency
activity from higher-frequency neural processes:
Power (f) =A·f2
1
f2+f2
1(2)
where Arepresents the amplitude parameter and f1denotes the characteristic
frequency at which the power spectrum transitions from flat (low-frequency plateau)
to steep decay (high-frequency roll-off). This Lorentzian model effectively captures the
fundamental 1/f characteristics of neural signals while identifying the critical transition
point. The fitting was performed using SciPy’s curve fit function, which is well-suited
for this two-parameter optimization problem. Physiologically, f1corresponds to the
13boundary between slow cortical potentials and faster network dynamics, typically
associated with default mode network fluctuations and global integration processes.
3.4.2 Step 2: Low-high frequency boundary identification using
spline multifractal modeling
For frequencies above f1, we applied a sophisticated spline multifractal equation
to identify f2, the second knee frequency that distinguishes low-frequency network
connectivity from high-frequency local processing:
To ensure smooth transitions between different scaling regimes and prevent fitting
artifacts, we implemented a cubic spline weight function:
w(f) =

0 if log( f)<log(f2)−s
1 if log( f)>log(f2) +s
1
2(1−cos(π(log(f)−log(f2)+s)
2s)) otherwise(3)
This weight function w(f) provides a smooth, differentiable transition between two
distinct power-law regimes. When f≪f2,w(f)≈0, ensuring the function follows low-
frequency scaling behavior characterized by βlow. Conversely, when f≫f2,w(f)≈
1, shifting to high-frequency scaling defined by βhigh. The smoothness parameter s
controls the sharpness of this transition, preventing abrupt discontinuities that could
introduce fitting artifacts.
The complete spline multifractal function then becomes:
Power (f) =A·fβlow(1−w(f))+βhighw(f)(4)
where:
•Ais the amplitude scaling factor
•βlowis the low-frequency scaling exponent (typically steeper, reflecting long-range
correlations)
•βhigh is the high-frequency scaling exponent (typically flatter, reflecting local
processing)
•f2is the second knee frequency (transition point between network and local
dynamics)
•sis the smoothness parameter controlling transition width
This five-parameter model was fitted using the iminuit package, specifically
designed for high-dimensional parameter estimation with robust convergence proper-
ties. Physiologically, f2represents the transition from large-scale network connectivity
to localized neural processing, typically corresponding to the boundary between
task-negative and task-positive network activity.
3.4.3 Frequency band segmentation and filtering implementation
Based on the identified knee frequencies f1andf2, we segmented each participant’s
time-series data into three physiologically distinct frequency bands:
1.Ultra-low frequency band ( < f 1): Captures slow cortical potentials, default
mode network activity, and global integration processes
142.Low frequency band ( f1tof2): Represents intermediate-scale network connec-
tivity and inter-regional communication
3.High frequency band ( > f 2): Reflects local circuit dynamics, sensorimotor
processing, and rapid cognitive operations
The segmentation was implemented using finite impulse response (FIR) filters from
thenitime package for ultra-low and low-frequency bands, and Boxcar filters for high-
frequency extraction. The choice of filter types was optimized through systematic
hyperparameter tuning on validation sets, evaluating their impact on downstream
classification performance. FIR filters were preferred for lower frequencies due to their
superior phase preservation properties, while Boxcar filters provided computational
efficiency for high-frequency components without compromising signal quality.
3.4.4 Validation of frequency-specific scaling properties
Dataset f1(Hz) f2(Hz) TR (s) Nyquist (Hz)
ABCD 0.0456 ±0.0106 0.0784 ±0.0151 0.735 0.6803
UKB 0.0624 ±0.0113 0.0961 ±0.0157 0.8 0.625
ABIDE 0.0182 ±0.0121 0.0299 ±0.0256 1.5 - 3.0 0.1667 - 0.3333
Table 4 Different f1,f2, TR and Nyquist frequency among datasets. f1,f2
are denoted as mean ±s.d.
Table 4 reports the dataset-wise knee frequencies ( f1,f2; mean ±s.d.), together
with the acquisition repetition time (TR) and the corresponding Nyquist limit
(Nyquist = 1 /(2·TR)). As expected, absolute knee values differ across datasets because
the analyzable frequency range is physically bounded by TR: ABCD (TR = 0 .735 s;
Nyquist = 0 .6803 Hz) and UKB (TR = 0 .8 s; Nyquist = 0 .625 Hz) exhibit higher
f1/f2than ABIDE, which spans longer TRs (1.5–3.0 s; Nyquist = 0 .1667–0 .3333 Hz).
Importantly, when expressed relative to the Nyquist limit, the knees occupy compara-
ble portions of the spectrum across datasets— f1≈5–10% and f2≈9–18% of Nyquist.
This pattern indicates that our data-driven procedure adapts to each dataset’s spec-
tral support while preserving a consistent relative band structure, in line with the
TR/Nyquist constraints of fMRI acquisitions.
In addition to the TR/Nyquist effects summarized in Table 4, we verified that
the learned knees are robust along three axes: population ,measurement time , and
boundary shifts . First, bootstrap resampling across subgroups revealed no significant
differences in f1orf2(p= 0.6541 and p= 0.8956). Second, an HCP test–retest
analysis (run–1 vs. run–2) showed no significant shifts ( p= 1.000 for f1;p= 0.9428
forf2). Third, perturbing each cutoff by ±5–10% yielded a broad performance plateau
centered at the learned boundaries (peak AUROC = 0 .916), indicating insensitivity to
small boundary changes. Full procedures and results are provided in Supplementary
Materials F.4, F.5.
15Dataset βultralow βlow βhigh
ABCD 0.2442 ±0.2991 1.7845 ±0.3836 1.1595 ±0.4260
UKB 0.0209 ±0.2185 2.8959 ±0.4562 1.1232 ±0.4107
ABIDE 0.5805 ±0.3925 2.5939 ±0.3923 0.9563 ±0.2228
Table 5 Different βvalue among frequency ranges and
datasets. Values are denoted as mean ±s.d.
DatasetLorentzian Equation Spline Multifractal Equation
Mean R2Mean R2
ABCD 0.7423 ±0.0765 0.6822 ±0.2375
UKB 0.6605 ±0.0786 0.8292 ±0.0854
ABIDE 0.7435 ±0.1018 0.8309 ±0.1019
Table 6 Goodness of Fit ( R2) Statistics for Lorentzian and Spline
Multifractal Equations Across Datasets. Values are presented as mean
±s.d.R2indicates the proportion of variance explained by each model.
To validate that our frequency decomposition captured distinct neurophysiological
processes, we computed scaling exponents ( βvalues) for each frequency band using
power-law fitting (Table 5):
Statistical analysis revealed significant differences in βvalues across all frequency
bands ( p < 0.001), confirming that each band exhibits unique scale-free dynamics.
Ultralow frequencies showed the flattest scaling (smallest β), consistent with long-
range temporal correlations. High frequencies exhibited intermediate scaling, reflecting
network-level integration. Low frequencies displayed the steepest scaling (largest β),
characteristic of local, rapidly decorrelated processes. These findings support the
hypothesis that frequency-specific decomposition captures fundamentally different
aspects of brain organization, from global integration to local specialization.
3.4.5 Validation of Frequency Threshold Stability
To rigorously evaluate the stability and reproducibility of our data-driven frequency
thresholds ( f1andf2), we performed a non-parametric bootstrapping procedure with
1,000 iterations. In each iteration, we randomly sub-sampled 80% of the subjects from
the original cohort and re-calculated the subject-specific f1andf2distributions. We
then assessed the stability of both the central tendency and the overall distributional
shape. The central tendencies of the thresholds demonstrated exceptional stability;
the distribution of differences between the sampled means and the original popula-
tion means was tightly centered at zero with negligible deviation for both f1andf2.
Furthermore, to assess the stability of the entire distributional shape, we performed a
two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for each iteration. The resulting p-values were
overwhelmingly non-significant ( p >0.05 in over 95% of iterations for both thresholds),
indicating that the distributions derived from the sub-samples were not statistically
different from the original population’s distribution. Taken together, these results
16confirm that our method for defining frequency bands is robust, reproducible, and
generalizable across subjects, thus validating its use for the primary analyses in this
study.
3.4.6 Comparison with other frequency-dividing methods
Our frequency decomposition is based on a physiologically grounded, data-driven char-
acterization of the scale-free fMRI spectrum: we fit Lorentzian components and locate
spectral knees with a spline procedure to obtain dataset-specific cutoffs ( f1, f2). We
compared this approach with two widely used alternatives.
First, a fixed-band scheme (Slow-5: 0.01–0.027 Hz; Slow-4: 0.027–0.073 Hz) ([29])
yielded a modest but consistent drop in performance for the same tasks (AUROC
= 0.911 vs. 0 .916 with our knees; Supplementary Materials F.3).
Second, we implemented an adaptive alternative approach that (i) computes the
Welch power spectral density, (ii) clusters frequencies into three groups via power-
weighted k-means (k=5), (iii) uses the midpoints between adjacent clusters as two
cutoffs, and (iv) performs wavelet-based decomposition using those data-driven bound-
aries ([30]). This adaptive variant achieved AUROC = 0 .905, broadly consistent yet
modestly below our knee-based method (Supplementary Materials F.3).
3.5 Confound analyses and propensity score matching
Associations between knee frequencies ( f1, f2) and sex, age, head motion (mean FD),
and site (22 levels) were assessed using regression/AN(C)OVA with site modeled as
a factor; multiplicity-adjusted p-values are reported in Supplementary Materials E.
For sensitivity, we performed 1:1 nearest-neighbor propensity score matching (logis-
tic model; covariates: sex, age, mean FD, site; caliper = 0 .2 SD of the logit; no
replacement) to create a confound-balanced subsample. Balance was confirmed by
standardized mean differences <0.10 for all matched covariates. Classification AUROC
was then compared before and after matching using a paired t-test.
3.6 Model Design
3.6.1 Model Architecture
MBBN integrates temporal and spatial processing through a dual-module architecture
that consists of the temporal module and the spatial module. These modules work
synergistically to encode both the temporal and spatial characteristics of frequency-
divided timeseries data, as shown in Figure 1 A. To ensure an effective balance between
generalization and specificity, a parameter-sharing strategy is employed, as outlined
below.
The temporal module (depicted as a blue oval in Figure 1 A) is designed to capture
the temporal dynamics of the data. For each frequency-divided timeseries (ultra-low,
low, and high), the data are processed independently using a shared BERT encoder,
reflecting the temporal similarities across frequency bands. The BERT encoder outputs
a sequence of hidden states for each timeseries, with the final hidden state correspond-
ing to the [CLS] token passed to a classifier. This process produces logits ( ˆyultralow ,
17ˆylow, and ˆyhigh), which represent the model’s predictions for each frequency range.
The hidden dimension size of the MBBN temporal module is set to match the number
of ROIs. Due to the constraints imposed by the BERT backbone in MBBN, the num-
ber of attention heads must be a divisor of the hidden dimension size. Consequently,
when using the Schaefer atlas, the number of attention heads is set to 8, whereas for
the HCP MMP1 atlas, it is set to 12.
The spatial module (depicted as a yellow-green oval in Figure 1 A) focuses on the
spatial connectivity among regions of interest (ROIs). Unlike the temporal module,
the spatial module uses a frequency-specific approach to capture the distinct spatial
patterns of each frequency band. Specifically, a multi-head attention mechanism is
applied to the transposed timeseries data, generating a set of attention matrices for
each frequency band. These attention matrices—reflecting the distinct focus of differ-
ent heads—are averaged to produce a single attention matrix per band. These averaged
matrices represent the spatial connectivity patterns, which are subsequently used to
compute the spatial loss (Equation 9). In practice, the MBBN spatial module receives
the transposed input of the temporal module, so the number of attention heads must
divide the sequence length. For example, we set 12 heads for ABCD (sequence length
is 348) and 8 heads for both UKB (464) and ABIDE (280).
Although the temporal and spatial modules do not directly exchange hidden states,
they remain closely coupled through the composite loss function. The total loss com-
bines cross-entropy (or task-specific) loss with the spatial loss, so backpropagation
updates parameters across the entire network. As a result, while the BERT-based
temporal module primarily absorbs gradient updates from the mask and task objec-
tives, and the attention-based spatial module is mostly driven by spatial loss, their
optimization processes are fundamentally interdependent. Changes in one module can
indirectly shift the parameter landscape of the other, ensuring a shared optimization
of temporal and spatial patterns.
This architectural design supports module specialization—BERT focuses on tem-
poral dependencies, while the attention module models spatial relationships—without
direct interference. Yet both modules ultimately contribute to the network’s overall
optimization, facilitating a more integrated representation of brain dynamics. Addi-
tionally, by treating these modules as partly separable, the framework allows for
independent evaluation and targeted enhancements in each module, preserving their
complementary roles in the final model.
As shown in Figure 1 B, the temporal and spatial modules operate on each fre-
quency range, generating corresponding logits and attention matrices. To obtain the
final prediction, the logits from the three frequency ranges are averaged and compared
with the true label ( ytrue) using a task-specific loss function ( Loss task). In paral-
lel, a spatial loss is computed to enforce distinct spatial connectivity patterns across
frequency bands. The composite loss function enforces both task performance and
frequency-specific spatial patterns:
Loss total=Loss task(ytrue,ˆyultralow +ˆylow+ˆyhigh
3) +λ·Loss spatial (5)
where task-specific loss ensures predictive accuracy while spatial loss encourages
distinct connectivity patterns across frequency bands.
18In Equation 5, Loss taskrepresents the cross-entropy loss for classification tasks
or L1 loss for regression tasks. The Loss spatial term, as described in Equation 9,
emphasizes the distinct spatial connectivity patterns inherent to each frequency band.
λwas determined by hyperparameter tuning. The chosen λvalue and the filter type
were shown in Table 7.
Dataset Filter Type Spatial Factor λ
Schaefer atlas
ABCD Boxcar 10
UKB Boxcar 1
ABIDE Boxcar 100
HCPMMP1 atlas
ABCD FIR 10
UKB Boxcar 1
ABIDE Boxcar 100
Table 7 Optimal filter types and λdetermined
through hyperparameter tuning
3.6.2 Parameter Sharing
To enhance model performance, we adopted a multi-view learning approach, which
is well-suited for frequency-divided timeseries data. We treat the ultra-low, low, and
high frequency time series as three ‘views’ of the same underlying data, where different
representations of the same underlying phenomenon are considered. Multi-view data
enables the model to leverage shared information across views, allowing it to capture
complementary aspects of the data.
For the temporal module, we utilized a parameter-sharing strategy. Given that
temporal dynamics exhibited minimal differences across frequency bands (as indicated
by similar autocorrelation structures), a single shared BERT encoder was used to
process timeseries data from all frequency bands. This approach allows the model to
exploit common temporal patterns across frequency bands, leading to a robust and
generalized representation of temporal dynamics.
In contrast, the spatial module required a frequency-specific approach. Previous
studies ([31]) and our analysis have shown that spatial connectivity patterns differ
significantly across frequency bands. Therefore, we implemented frequency-specific
parameters for the spatial module. Self-attention-weighted connectivity was calcu-
lated independently for each frequency range, with each frequency band using its
own set of parameters to capture the unique spatial relationships among ROIs. This
design ensures that the model preserves the distinct connectivity characteristics of
each frequency band while maintaining the interpretability of spatial attention.
This parameter-sharing strategy strikes a balance between generalization and speci-
ficity. Shared temporal parameters capture global patterns common across frequency
bands, while frequency-specific spatial parameters emphasize the unique spatial rela-
tionships within each frequency band. By integrating this approach with task-specific
19and spatial loss functions (Equation 5), the model effectively captures the multi-
level organization of frequency-divided timeseries data, facilitating the identification
of relevant biomarkers across multiple scales.
3.7 Temporal BERT Module
3.7.1 Data Encoding
To capture temporal dependencies across regions of interest (ROIs), the frequency-
divided time-series data were sequentially input into the BERT model. Each signal at
a single time point was treated as a distinct token, with the token length corresponding
to the total number of ROIs. This encoding strategy effectively represented both the
temporal and spatial dynamics of the fMRI data, ensuring that these features were
preserved for downstream analysis.
3.7.2 Using Original Form of BERT
FMRI BOLD signal data consists of long sequences, typically ranging from 280 to
464 tokens, necessitating a model that can handle such extended sequences. BERT,
originally developed for natural language processing (NLP) tasks, is particularly well-
suited for this purpose due to its ability to capture complex contextual relationships
within sequences ([32]). This makes BERT an ideal model for modeling the intricate
temporal dependencies inherent in fMRI data.
In contrast, models like GPT are optimized for text generation tasks and do not
emphasize inter-sequence contextual relationships, which are critical for our analysis.
Unlike GPT’s causal masking—which is tailored to text generation and unidirectional
context—BERT’s bidirectional attention allows it to capture long-range temporal
dependencies from both past and future time points simultaneously, making it more
suitable for modeling complex fMRI time series. Although some previous studies have
used convolutional filters as a preprocessing step before entering signals into BERT
([33]), we chose to bypass this step. Although convolutional preprocessing can be
computationally efficient, it may sacrifice the preservation of fine-grained temporal
dynamics within the fMRI data, which could impact model performance (see Sup-
plementary Materials F). By directly inputting the time-series data into the original
BERT structure, we aimed to retain the full complexity of the temporal dynamics,
allowing the model to effectively capture both short-term and long-term dependencies.
To derive a single, task-relevant representation from the entire fMRI time series, we
utilize the special [CLS] token, a standard component of the BERT architecture. This
token is prepended to the input sequence and is designed to aggregate information
across all time points during the model’s encoding process. Conceptually, the [CLS]
token functions like an executive summary of a detailed report. While the model
processes the entire sequence (the full report), it learns to distill the most critical
information for the downstream classification task into the final hidden state of this
single token. The classifier then uses this condensed summary vector to make its
prediction (e.g., diagnosing ADHD), providing an efficient and powerful mechanism
for sequence-level classification.
203.8 Spatial Attention Module
3.8.1 Extracting and Validating Neurobiologically-Informed
Features from Attention
While traditional functional connectivity (FC) methods based on statistical corre-
lations often assume linearity and static relationships ([34]), brain dynamics are
inherently nonlinear and time-varying. Our framework aims to capture these complex
interactions using a self-attention mechanism, as implemented in transformer models
([35]).
The multi-head attention architecture is particularly well-suited for this task.
By projecting the input into multiple representation subspaces, the model can learn
diverse and multifaceted relationships between brain regions in parallel. In our model,
each of the multiple attention heads generates a unique NROI×NROI attention
matrix. These matrices highlight distinct patterns of inter-regional relationships that
the model learns to prioritize for its predictions; for example, one head might focus on
frontal-temporal relationships while another emphasizes occipital-parietal connections.
Crucially, instead of defining these attention patterns as a new form of connectivity,
our study treats them as a rich source of interpretable, data-driven features. To create
a comprehensive summary of the patterns learned by the model for a given fMRI scan,
we compute an aggregate attention map by averaging the matrices from all heads. This
final map represents the pairwise regional relationships that the model, in aggregate,
deemed most salient for a given prediction.
The primary goal of this analysis is to validate whether these learned, salient
patterns are neurobiologically meaningful. To achieve this, we use these aggregate
attention maps in a group-level validation procedure. First, we identify which inter-
regional patterns consistently differ between clinical and control groups (creating a
’group-difference attention map’). We then test the hypothesis that these model-
derived discriminative patterns correspond to known alterations in brain functional
organization by comparing them to group-difference maps derived from traditional FC
analyses. This approach allows us to use conventional FC as a ground truth to confirm
that our model is learning clinically relevant neural signatures.
3.8.2 Spatial Loss
The three frequency-divided components, separated by frequencies ( f1,f2), exhibit
more distinct differences in connectivity patterns ([31]). To highlight these differences
and enforce this specialization, we introduced a novel spatial loss term designed to
encourage different spatial connectivity patterns for each frequency range. Concep-
tually, this loss function can be analogized to a rule that rewards a cartographer
for creating three different, specialized maps of a city (e.g., a traffic map, a zoning
map, and a topographical map) from the same satellite data, rather than three nearly
identical general maps.
Specifically, the loss term maximizes the sum of L1 losses between attention matri-
ces derived from different frequency ranges (Equation 9), thereby penalizing similarity.
The use of the negative logarithm in the loss function further magnifies smaller differ-
ences between frequency bands, ensuring that even subtle distinctions are emphasized
21during training. This approach enables the model to learn unique spatial connectivity
patterns for each frequency band, reflecting the potentially distinct contributions of
these bands to brain activity. Moreover, this spatial loss term works in conjunction
with other loss functions in the model to strike a balance between generalization and
specificity.
Loss high−low=Loss L1(attmat high, attmat low) (6)
Loss high−ultralow =Loss L1(attmat high, attmat ultralow ) (7)
Loss ultralow −low=Loss L1(attmat ultralow , attmat low) (8)
Loss spatial =−log(Loss high−low+Loss high−ultralow +Loss ultralow −low) (9)
The negative logarithm amplifies subtle connectivity differences, ensuring the
model learns distinct spatial patterns even when frequency bands show similar
overall connectivity structures. We confirmed that this approach indeed derives
neurobiologically plausible network properties (see Supplementary Materials B).
3.9 Communicability-based Pretraining Strategy
3.9.1 Masking Strategy and Pretraining Loss
The goal of pretraining is to enable the model to learn the underlying structure of brain
signal data in a self-supervised manner. To achieve this, we incorporated the concept of
communicability into the pretraining process. A detailed definition of communicability
used in this study is provided in Supplementary Materials A.1.
High-communicability nodes act as critical hubs in brain networks, integrating
information across distributed regions. Conceptually, our masking strategy can be
analogized to understanding a social network by temporarily hiding its most central
’influencers’ and inferring their roles based on the activity of their connections. By
masking these influential nodes during pretraining, we force the model to learn their
functional roles through contextual inference, similar to masked language modeling
but tailored to brain network topology.
Our pretraining strategy draws inspiration from masking techniques commonly
used in language models to capture contextual relationships and data patterns ([32]).
We hypothesized that masking nodes with high communicability would encourage the
model to infer the activity of these influential nodes based on the surrounding network
dynamics. This approach highlights the role of high-communicability hubs in shaping
the overall structure of resting-state networks and compels the model to learn the
underlying rules of neural communication.
To validate this hypothesis, we compared three masking strategies:
•Masking nodes with high communicability.
•Masking nodes with low communicability.
•Randomly masking regions of interest (ROIs).
Detailed model performance results (Supplementary Materials G.1) show that
masking high-communicability nodes led to the most effective learning of the data
structure, resulting in superior performance in downstream tasks.
Pretraining involved two complementary masking strategies: temporal masking and
spatial masking (Figure 4). Spatial masking involved masking the timeseries data of
22timelengt h
transposetimelengt hA tt ention 
MatricesNumber of 
A tt ention 
Heads]ROIROIBERT
Multi Head 
A tt ention......A
masking
masking
maskingTimeseries in
high
fr equency range
Timeseries in
lo w
fr equency range
Timeseries in
ultralo w
fr equency rangetimelengt hROICM-BBN
Pr etraining 
Module [high]Hidden stat es
[high]
Hidden stat es
[lo w]
Hidden stat es
[ultralo w]M-BBN
Pr etraining 
Module [lo w]maskingTimeseries in
fr equency range νThe t op k most 
communicable 
nodesT emporal 
windo wstimelengt hROIB
M-BBN
Pr etraining 
Module [ultralo w]A v eraged
A tt ention 
Matrix
[high]
A v eraged
A tt ention 
Matrix
[lo w]
A v eraged
A tt ention 
Matrix
[ultralo w]timelengt hROIhidden stat esT empor al Module
Spatial ModuleFig. 4 MBBN Pretraining Workflow. A. Each frequency-divided timeseries is processed using
the MBBN pretraining module, where the temporal module extracts hidden states using a BERT
encoder, and the spatial module computes attention matrices via a multi-head attention mechanism.
B.Masking strategies: spatial masking nullifies the time series data of the top knodes with the
highest communicability scores, while temporal masking zeros out ROI signals within predefined
time windows. C.Pretraining is conducted separately for high, low, and ultralow frequency bands.
Parameter sharing is applied in the temporal module but not in the spatial module. Outputs include
hidden states and averaged attention matrices for each frequency range.
the top knodes with the highest communicability scores, where kis less than the total
number of ROIs. Temporal masking, on the other hand, initialized all ROI signals to
zero within predefined time windows. Both strategies were applied to each frequency
band (ultralow, low, and high), denoted as ν.
23The masking loss ( Loss mask) was calculated as the sum of L1 losses between the
original BOLD signals ( BOLD ν) and their masked counterparts ( maskedBOLD ν):
Loss mask =X
νLoss L1(BOLD ν, maskedBOLD ν) (10)
The pretraining loss was the combination of the masking loss and the spatial loss
(Equation 9), which enables the model to simultaneously learn node relationships and
recover masked regions. λemployed in the pretraining loss function was maintained
at the same value as that used in the total loss calculation (Equation 5) during from-
scratch training.
Loss pretrain =Loss mask +λ·Loss spatial (11)
3.9.2 Temporal Masking Optimization
In temporal masking, rather than predicting a single time point, the model is tasked
with predicting entire time windows. This strategy makes the task more challenging,
encouraging the model to learn temporal dependencies more effectively. Masking was
implemented by setting ROI signals to zero within predefined time windows.
To optimize temporal masking, we empirically tested various configurations by
adjusting two parameters:
•N: the length of the masked time window.
•k: the distance between consecutive masked windows.
The best performance in downstream tasks was achieved with N= 20 and k= 1,
where Nranged from 5 to 45 in multiples of 5, and kwas an integer between 1 and 5.
3.9.3 Implementation Details and Dataset
Pretraining was conducted using the UK Biobank dataset, with a sequence length of
464. During finetuning, padding was applied to align shorter sequences ( τ) to this
fixed length, with padding added equally to both ends of the sequence ((464 −τ)/2).
The outputs from the pretraining process, which include hidden states and attention
matrices for each frequency band, were used to initialize the MBBN model for down-
stream tasks. Figure 4 illustrates the pretraining workflow, including the temporal and
spatial masking procedures. Temporal masking is represented by lavender rectangles,
while spatial masking is depicted with purple lines.
3.10 Interpretability
MBBN computes attention matrices between Regions of Interest (ROIs) across dif-
ferent frequency ranges. These matrices serve as estimates of functional connectivity,
making it crucial to analyze individual connections to understand their contributions
to phenotype classification. This analysis offers insights into the neural mechanisms
underlying the phenotype of interest.
Traditional attribution methods are not directly applicable to this model, as the
relationship between attention matrices and target values is indirect. To address this
24challenge, we developed a GradCAM ([36])-inspired approach to identify frequency-
specific connections driving psychiatric classification. This method highlights con-
nections where gradient magnitude (importance) aligns with attention strength
(activation), revealing clinically relevant biomarkers.
Heatmap k=∂Loss spatial
∂fk(input k)⊙fk(input k) (12)
GradCAM typically highlights important regions by computing the gradient of
the loss for the target class and weighting it by the output feature maps. Similarly,
we compute heatmaps by multiplying the activation values (attention matrices) with
their respective gradients, as described in Equation 12. This method highlights specific
functional connectivity patterns that are relevant to mental disorders. In Equation
12,frefers to the spatial attention module, Loss spatial corresponds to the loss term
from Equation 9, krepresents the frequency range (high, low, ultralow), and input k
denotes the fMRI BOLD data for frequency range k(Heatmap k∈R(NROI×NROI)).
To interpret the model’s predictions, we selected the best-performing model based
on the validation dataset and applied it to the test dataset. Heatmaps were generated
for true positive subjects. Analysis for false positive and false negative subjects was
conducted to validate the method. For inter-group comparisons, we conducted t-tests
to identify statistically significant connections ( p < 0.05). For multiple comparison
correction, we applied False Discovery Rate (FDR) (Benjamin-Hochberg method) to
control for Type I errors. Then we calculated the effect size using Cohen’s d ([37]). The
sign of the t-statistic indicated which group had a higher attribution score for a given
connection. For example, in the classification of ADHD using the ABCD dataset, a
positive t-statistic suggested that a connection contributed more significantly to the
Healthy Control (HC) group than to the ADHD group.
Statistically significant connections ( p <0.05) and regions were analyzed, but the
number of connections was too large to handle effectively. To address this, we selected
only a few top connections based on the absolute values of Cohen’s d for further
evaluation of their impact. An exhaustive list of all significant connections can be
found in Supplementary Materials H.
3.10.1 Stability and Consistency of Interpretability Analysis
To assess the stability and consistency of the connections identified by our GradCAM-
inspired approach, we performed a rigorous bootstrapping analysis. We created 100
subsamples by randomly selecting 100 subjects from the test set for both the ADHD
and ASD classification tasks. For each subsample, we repeated the group comparison
and identified the top 100 most discriminative connections based on effect size (Cohen’s
d).
The consistency of the identified connections across these subsamples was quan-
tified using the Jaccard Index , which measures the similarity between sets. The
analysis revealed a high degree of stability for the top-ranked connections in all
frequency bands:
•High-frequency band: Jaccard Index = 0 .940±0.101
•Low-frequency band: Jaccard Index = 0 .900±0.078
25•Ultralow-frequency band: Jaccard Index = 0 .920±0.035
These high Jaccard Index values, consistently above 0.9, indicate that the dis-
criminative connectivity patterns highlighted by our model are highly robust and not
driven by a specific subset of subjects. This confirms that the identified biomarkers
are stable features of the clinical groups.
3.11 Performance Comparison with Baseline Models
To evaluate the effectiveness of MBBN in learning spatiotemporal dynamics, we com-
pared its performance with baseline models, including functional connectivity-based
models (XGBoost ([38]), BNT ([5])) and temporal dynamics models (BolT ([6]),
vanilla BERT ([32])). These models were selected based on their relevance to brain
dynamics interpretation, either through static functional connectivity or sequential
processing of temporal data. While functional connectivity-based models primarily
rely on static representations, temporal dynamics models capture sequential patterns
but do not explicitly integrate spatial relationships. MBBN addresses this gap by com-
bining both spatiotemporal characteristics using its frequency-dividing encoder and
spatial attention module. Given that MBBN is an extension of vanilla BERT with
additional architectural enhancements, a direct comparison between the two provides
a robust evaluation of these modifications. While MBBN demonstrated superior per-
formance across several downstream tasks, including the ABCD ADHD classification
task, with significant improvements in accuracy and AUC scores, not all tasks showed
a statistically significant advantage. Detailed performance comparison is described in
Supplementary Materials G.1.
To ensure a fair evaluation, we conducted statistical tests (paired t-tests) to com-
pare the performance of MBBN with baseline models on each task. The p-values for
these comparisons indicated that, although MBBN did not outperform all baseline
models in every metric, the differences were not statistically significant ( p >0.05) in
cases where baseline models showed slightly better performance. These results suggest
that MBBN encodes information at a level comparable to or better than existing mod-
els while providing the additional advantage of capturing spatiotemporal dynamics,
which baseline models are unable to incorporate.
4 Discussion
This study presents MBBN, a novel deep learning framework that integrates biolog-
ically grounded principles with frequency-aware self-attention to model spatiotem-
poral brain dynamics. By leveraging scale-free and multifractal properties of neural
signals, MBBN captures essential patterns of brain organization that are often
overlooked by conventional transformer-based models. Additionally, MBBN employs
communicability-based masking and frequency-aware self-attention to capture bio-
logically meaningful connectivity patterns across multiple frequency ranges, enabling
accurate and interpretable predictions of cognitive and clinical outcomes.
26Unlike previous approaches that rely on broadband or static representations
([5, 6]), MBBN applies a frequency decomposition strategy to encode neural oscilla-
tions as discrete features, enabling a richer characterization of dynamic connectivity
patterns. This frequency-resolved approach is particularly critical given that neural
communication is mediated by distinct oscillatory dynamics across frequency bands,
with high-frequency oscillations supporting local processing ([39]) and low-frequency
rhythms facilitating long-range integration ([40]). Traditional broadband or narrow-
band analyses often obscure these nuanced patterns by averaging across spectrally
diverse signals, potentially masking functionally specific effects. The MBBN frame-
work overcomes these limitations by capturing such frequency-specific properties,
allowing for a more precise and physiologically grounded understanding of brain net-
work dynamics. Furthermore, our communicability-based ([41, 42]) masking method
ensures that topological structures within brain networks are embedded into learned
representations, improving both robustness and interpretability.
Importantly, MBBN-derived connectivity patterns complement rather than repli-
cate traditional functional connectivity. While moderate anticorrelation existed at the
broadband level, frequency-specific analyses revealed unique network dynamics (Sup-
plementary Table C2), confirming that MBBN captures neurophysiologically distinct
information critical for clinical interpretation.
The biological plausibility of MBBN is further supported by its incorporation of
the scale-free property, characterized by a power-law exponent ( β), which differenti-
ates brain states and regions based on their temporal correlation profiles ([2, 43–47]).
Variations in βvalues are associated with functional specialization and pathological
alterations ([16, 17, 48, 49]), underscoring the importance of integrating these intrinsic
properties into computational models. By incorporating communicability-based mask-
ing, MBBN systematically accounts for graph-structured brain data, addressing the
limitations of random masking strategies ([50, 51]) and enhancing understanding of
network-level interactions ([41, 52]).
When applied to graph-structured functional brain data, random masking fails to
consider node importance and the non-Euclidean nature of the data ([50, 51]), leading
to uncertainties in reconstructing masked information. MBBN overcomes these limita-
tions through a communicability-based masking strategy, which quantifies information
flow across all possible network paths and emphasizes the role of high-communicability
hubs in shaping network dynamics ([41, 52]). By selectively masking these critical
hubs and reconstructing their activity through interactions with surrounding nodes,
MBBN learns structural dependencies intrinsic to neural systems, enhancing both
interpretability and robustness. This approach establishes MBBN as a foundational
framework for advancing neuroimaging analysis.
Across diverse cohorts—including UK Biobank, ABCD, and ABIDE—MBBN con-
sistently demonstrated strong predictive performance, capturing neural organizational
principles across age groups. Unlike many existing models that are validated only on
narrow demographics, MBBN successfully generalized across developmental stages,
revealing its potential as a neuroimaging tool with strong generalizability across child,
adolescent, and adult cohorts.
27Our frequency-specific analyses uncovered distinct connectivity disruptions in
ADHD and ASD. In ADHD, we observed attenuated high-frequency connectivity in
fronto-sensorimotor networks, which may underlie core symptoms such as inattention
and executive dysfunction ([53, 54]). At lower frequencies, altered sensory and language
processing circuits were evident ([55–58]), and in the ultralow-frequency range, both
hypo- and hyperconnectivity patterns suggested inefficient compensatory mechanisms,
particularly involving the parahippocampal and cingulate regions ([59–63]).
A striking finding was the frequency-dependent shift in Area OP2-3-VS (Opercular
parts of Areas 2 and 3 and adjacent Ventral Somatosensory / Sylvian region) connec-
tivity in ADHD. This region consistently emerged as a central node across different
frequency bands, suggesting it may serve as a dynamic hub that potentially coordinates
neural communication based on oscillatory states. Rather than subserving a fixed func-
tion, Area OP2-3-VS appears to assume context-dependent roles, possibly regulating
cross-frequency information flow or facilitating inter-network switching—mechanisms
that could be critical for coherent cognitive function. In ADHD, disruptions in these
putative regulatory processes may contribute to frequency-specific connectivity alter-
ations and the disorder’s heterogeneous symptomatology, underscoring the potential
importance of spectral dynamics in characterizing functional hubs.
In ASD, high-frequency hubs involving orbitofrontal and somatosensory circuits
were prominent, consistent with known deficits in emotional and social processing ([64–
67]). At low frequencies, the posterior frontopolar cortex emerged as a key integrative
hub; disruptions here may impair the coordination of memory, decision-making, and
multisensory integration essential for goal-directed behavior ([68–71]). Interestingly,
ultralow-frequency analyses revealed heightened connectivity between the temporo-
parietal junction and prefrontal regions, possibly reflecting compensatory cognitive
strategies or atypical resource allocation during social cognition tasks ([72–75]).
Collectively, these results illustrate that MBBN not only outperforms prior mod-
els in predictive capacity but also provides interpretable biomarkers aligned with
known neurodevelopmental patterns. The model’s clinical relevance is first established
by its ability to replicate and validate previously identified neurobiological markers.
For instance, in ADHD, our model identified attenuated high-frequency connectiv-
ity within fronto-sensorimotor networks , while in ASD, it highlighted disruptions in
high-frequency hubs involving the orbitofrontal and somatosensory circuits, aligning
directly with well-documented deficits in emotional processing and social cognition.
Beyond this important validation, the unique architecture of MBBN enables the
generation of novel, testable hypotheses by revealing the frequency-specific nature
of these disruptions. The first novel insight relates to ADHD, where we identified
Area OP2-3-VS as a dynamic hub whose connectivity patterns shift depending on
the oscillatory state. This leads us to propose that a central mechanism of the dis-
order may be a disruption in the coordination of information flow, orchestrated by
this hub’s inability to flexibly manage frequency-dependent network communication.
Secondly, our model offers a significant refinement to the hyperconnectivity theory in
ASD. We discovered that the heightened connectivity between the temporo-parietal
junction and prefrontal regions was not a broadband phenomenon but was predomi-
nantly observed in the ultralow-frequency band. This novel, frequency-specific finding
28suggests that atypical neural resource allocation in ASD is tied to specific, slow-
timescale dynamics, providing a more precise biomarker than previously understood.
By aligning transformer-based modeling with core neuroscientific principles, MBBN
offers a scalable and biologically plausible framework for advancing our understanding
of individualized brain dynamics.
While MBBN offers notable methodological advancements, we acknowledge sev-
eral limitations that offer avenues for future work. First, the communicability-based
masking is computationally demanding, and future iterations could investigate more
efficient approximations like those based on polynomial expansions or random walks
[42]. Second, a limitation pertains to the model’s modest performance on regression
tasks. We attribute this primarily to the nature of the regression targets (e.g., scores
from single questionnaires or behavioral tests), which have an inherently lower signal-
to-noise ratio compared to the robust diagnostic labels used for classification. This
data-level challenge is likely compounded by the intrinsic bias of transformers to learn
non-smooth functions, which may be less optimal for capturing the subtle variations
in continuous phenotypes [76]. Third, the spatial loss weight λwas tuned via grid-
search. While a more principled approach would be a dynamic weighting scheme, our
experiments with a gradient-norm-based method showed sensitivity to noisy initial
gradients and did not consistently outperform a well-tuned fixed λ. Thus, developing
more robust dynamic heuristics remains a key challenge for future work. Finally, while
the model proved robust across cohorts with heterogeneous acquisition parameters,
further validation on more diverse populations, including elderly and neurodegenera-
tive cohorts, is required. While our evaluation shows that MBBN’s advantage is less
pronounced for regression targets, we emphasize that our core contribution is method-
ological: a frequency-resolved, biologically grounded framework that can serve as a
foundation for future models to better capture continuous outcomes. At the same
time, MBBN exhibits strong and practically relevant performance on categorical phe-
notypes, achieving high AUROCs (e.g., sex classification in ABCD: 0.916; UKB: 0.980;
ASD classification in ABIDE: 0.810). This balance clarifies our positioning: MBBN is
a methodological advance that already delivers high utility for clinical differentiation
tasks, while providing a principled basis for subsequent extensions aimed at improving
regression performance.
Looking ahead, our primary goals are to enhance the framework’s accessibility and
expand its scientific applications. To mitigate the significant computational cost of
pretraining, we are releasing our trained models to the public, allowing researchers
with limited infrastructure to bypass this intensive step and apply our framework
directly via efficient fine-tuning. Furthermore, we plan to develop more lightweight
versions of MBBN through architectural simplification and knowledge distillation,
creating student models suitable for resource-constrained clinical settings. In addi-
tion, future research could explore architectural enhancements—such as Smoothness
Regularization or a Hybrid Architecture—to further improve regression performance,
complementing the model’s strong classification capability. A key future direction is
extending MBBN from resting-state to task-evoked fMRI. While the scale-free assump-
tion for our frequency decomposition is most stable during rest, we hypothesize that
the Multi-Band Attention mechanism is inherently well-suited to capture transient,
29task-driven neural dynamics. For instance, the model could learn to detect task-related
power shifts in specific frequency bands—such as increased high-frequency activity in
the frontoparietal network during a working memory task—to classify cognitive states
and extract dynamic, task-evoked connectivity. Equally important will be validating
MBBN’s applicability across diverse patient populations to move toward broader clin-
ical utility. We are actively pursuing this line of research to broaden our framework’s
applicability and provide deeper insights into the neural correlates of cognition.
In conclusion, MBBN establishes a new standard for interpretable, frequency-
resolved brain modeling. By integrating neurophysiological principles with transformer
architectures, it offers both predictive power and mechanistic insights, laying a
solid foundation for future data-driven applications in clinical and developmental
neuroscience.
Data and Code Availability
The code is available on Github (https://github.com/Transconnectome/MBBN). The
UKB, ABCD, and ABIDE datasets are publicly available to researchers.
Author Contributions
Sangyoon Bae conceptualized the research, implemented the core algorithms, and
conducted all experiments. Junbeom Kwon contributed to code optimization and
manuscript preparation.
Declarations
Nothing to declare.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant
funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2021R1C1C1006503, RS-2023-00266787,
RS-2023-00265406, RS-2024-00421268), by Creative-Pioneering Researchers Program
through Seoul National University(No. 200-20240057), by Semi-Supervised Learn-
ing Research Grant by SAMSUNG(No.A0426-20220118), by Identify the network of
brain preparation steps for concentration Research Grant by LooxidLabs(No.339-
20230001), by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) [NO.RS-2021-
II211343, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Seoul National University)]
by the MSIT(Ministry of Science, ICT), Korea, under the Global Research Sup-
port Program in the Digital Field program(RS-2024-00421268) supervised by the
IITP(Institute for Information & Communications Technology Planning & Eval-
uation), by the National Supercomputing Center with supercomputing resources
including technical support(KSC-2023-CRE-0568) and by the Ministry of Education
of the Republic of Korea and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-
2021S1A3A2A02090597), and by Artificial intelligence industrial convergence cluster
30development project funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT(MSIT, Korea) &
Gwangju Metropolitan City.
Appendix A Pretraining
A.1 Communicability
Communicability encompasses not only the shortest paths but also other types of
walks between nodes pandqwithin a network. A network can be represented as a
graph G= (V, E), where Vrepresents nodes and Erepresents the edges connecting
the nodes. Let us denote the number of nodes as nand the number of edges as m. The
adjacency matrix of the graph is A(G) =A, where Aijtakes a value of 1 if nodes iand
jare connected and 0 otherwise. The communicability between nodes pandqin the
network, denoted as Gpq, incorporates eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the adjacency
matrix. Let λ1≥λ2≥ ··· ≥ λnbe the eigenvalues in non-increasing order, and let
ϕj(p) represent the p-th element of the j-th orthonormal eigenvector corresponding to
eigenvalue λj. Then, communicability is calculated as follows:
Gpq=∞X
j=1ϕj(p)ϕj(q)eλj(A1)
Communicability provides a measure of how efficiently information flows between
nodes by considering not just direct connections but also indirect pathways weighted
by their importance. This property makes communicability particularly suitable
for identifying high-influence nodes in brain networks, which are then used in our
pretraining masking strategy.
A.2 Effective Pretraining: Finding the Optimal Number of
Epochs
ABC
DEF
Supplementary Figure A1 Alpha Value Changes by Pretraining Epochs (HCPMMP1
Atlas, Epochs: 100-600)
31Determining the optimal number of epochs for pretraining is crucial for creating
an effective pretraining strategy. We utilized weightwatcher ([28]), a diagnostic tool
based on traditional statistical learning theory and statistical mechanics, to identify
well-trained models. Weightwatcher analyzes the norms of the weight matrix Wand
parameters of power-law (PL) fit on the eigenvalues of Wto assess training quality
without requiring data.
According to the Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR) Theory, lower PL
exponent ( α) values indicate stronger implicit self-regularization, leading to better
generalization. Consistently low αvalues across layers allow effective correlation flow,
enabling the gradual transformation of data correlations through each layer. As shown
in previous work, layers with αvalues below 6 are deemed well-trained, while those
exceeding 6 are considered poorly trained.
In the following figures, the x-axis represents the layers, and the y-axis represents
theαvalues. The red dotted line marks the threshold of α= 6. The number of layers
with αvalues above 6 converges to a single layer after epoch 500 (Supplementary
Figure A1). We hypothesize that the epoch at which the pattern of layers with α
values exceeding 6 stabilizes marks the optimal pretraining epoch. In our monitoring
process, we utilized WeightWatcher to analyze the pretrained model at intervals of
100 epochs. We identified the critical epoch nat which the number of layer with α >6
converges. Subsequently, we conducted a series of fine-tuning experiments at 10-epoch
intervals between epochs n−100 and nto empirically determine the optimal epoch
for model performance. In HCPMMP1 atlas, nwas 600.
Selecting these epochs ensures that most layers in the model achieve sufficient
self-regularization, improving overall generalization performance during fine-tuning.
Appendix B Interpretation of Network Properties
MeasureModularity Small-worldness Parameters
FC Attention FC Attention
γ λ σ γ λ σ
High frequency 0.0278 0.0576 4.7683 1.4239 3.3487 9.3960 0.9220 10.1913
Low frequency 0.0251 0.0701 4.8803 1.4140 3.4514 5.6272 0.9953 5.6539
Ultralow frequency 0.0350 0.0991 4.8600 1.4794 3.2850 8.3929 0.9229 9.0941
Raw (Non-dividing) 0.0630 <0.0001 7.7804 1.6143 4.8197 5.9527 0.9254 6.4329
Supplementary Table B1 Comparison of Network Properties between FC and Attention Matrix
Our analysis of network properties provides strong evidence that frequency-
specific attention matrices capture meaningful connectivity patterns that differ from
traditional functional connectivity (FC).
•Modularity quantifies the strength of division of a network into modules or commu-
nities. It measures how well a network can be decomposed into distinct subgroups,
with higher values indicating more distinct community structures where connections
32within communities are denser than connections between communities. Formally,
it is defined as the fraction of edges that fall within given communities minus the
expected fraction if edges were distributed at random while preserving node degrees.
•Small-worldness parameters characterize the topological properties of a network
that exhibits both high clustering and short path lengths:
–Gamma ( γ): The clustering coefficient ratio comparing the observed network
to a random network with the same number of nodes and edges. Higher values
indicate greater local connectivity and clustering, reflecting more efficient local
information processing.
–Lambda ( λ): The characteristic path length ratio comparing the observed net-
work to a random network. Values closer to 1 indicate efficient global integration
and information transfer across the network.
–Sigma ( σ): The small-worldness index calculated as γ/λ. Values significantly
greater than 1 indicate that the network exhibits small-world properties, char-
acterized by high local clustering and relatively short path lengths. Small-world
networks are considered optimal for information processing, combining efficient
local processing with global integration.
These network metrics provide quantitative measures for assessing the topological
organization of brain networks and are widely used in neuroimaging studies to char-
acterize functional and structural connectivity patterns. Several key observations can
be made from Supplementary Table B1:
1.Frequency-dependent modularity : The attention matrices exhibit distinct
modularity and small-worldness patterns across frequency bands (high, low, and
ultralow frequencies). A clear trend of increasing modularity with decreasing fre-
quency (0.0576 →0.0701→0.0991) is observed. This pattern aligns with findings
from [77], which demonstrated that resting-state BOLD signals display frequency-
specific network architecture, where networks that are finely subdivided in lower
frequency bands become integrated into fewer networks in higher frequency bands
rather than reconfigured. Such evidence supports the observation that modularity
values are higher in lower frequency bands, consistent with our results.
2.Contrasting patterns with FC : While FC exhibits its highest modularity in the
raw (unfiltered) condition (0.0630), attention-based connectivity shows essentially
no modularity in the raw condition ( <0.0001). This striking difference suggests that
our attention mechanism captures frequency-specific network organization that is
lost when analyzing the full frequency spectrum together.
3.Small-worldness characteristics : The small-worldness parameters ( γ,λ, and
σ) reveal distinct network architectures between FC and attention-based connec-
tivity. Notably, attention matrices consistently show higher clustering ( γ) and
small-worldness ( σ) values across frequency bands compared to FC, while main-
taining more optimal path length properties ( λcloser to 1). This indicates that
attention-based connectivity may better preserve the small-world architecture that
is characteristic of brain networks.
334.Frequency-specific information : Raw data without frequency decomposition
fails to exhibit meaningful modularity in the attention matrix, whereas frequency-
decomposed data reveals distinct modular structures. These findings suggest effec-
tive coupling between the spatial module and frequency-dividing strategy, enabling
the extraction of neurobiologically relevant patterns. This observation underscores
the importance of frequency-specific analysis when employing attention-based
connectivity measures to characterize brain network organization.
These findings support our claim that frequency-specific attention matrices repre-
sent a valid and interpretable new form of connectivity measure, capturing network
properties that complement traditional FC measures.
Appendix C Correlation Analysis Between FC and
Attention-Based Connectivity
To further investigate the relationship between functional connectivity (FC) and our
proposed attention-based connectivity measure, we conducted correlation analyses
across different frequency bands. Spearman correlation measures the monotonic rela-
tionship between two variables by evaluating the rank order association, making it
robust to outliers and nonlinear relationships. Kendall tau is a similar non-parametric
measure that assesses the ordinal association between two variables by analyzing the
number of concordant and discordant pairs, providing a measure of agreement in
rankings. The results are presented in Table C2.
Frequency Band Spearman Correlation Kendall Tau
Raw (Non-dividing) -0.6081 -0.4367
High frequency -0.0952 -0.0700
Low frequency -0.1459 -0.1072
Ultralow frequency -0.1973 -0.1451
Supplementary Table C2 Correlation Analysis Between FC and
Attention Matrix
The correlation analysis reveals several important insights:
1.Complementary information : The strong negative correlation between FC
and attention-based connectivity in the raw condition (Spearman ρ=−0.6081,
Kendall τ=−0.4367) indicates that these two measures capture fundamentally
different aspects of brain connectivity. This negative correlation suggests that our
attention-based connectivity is not merely replicating traditional FC but providing
complementary information.
2.Frequency-specific patterns : When examining frequency-specific bands, the cor-
relations become considerably weaker (ranging from approximately -0.10 to -0.20),
suggesting that each frequency band captures unique connectivity patterns.
3.Methodological validity : The consistent negative correlations across all fre-
quency bands, albeit weaker in the frequency-specific analyses, indicate that our
34attention mechanism systematically extracts connectivity information that differs
from traditional FC. This suggests that attention-based connectivity represents a
valid new form of connectivity measure with its interpretable meaning.
These correlation findings, combined with the network property analysis, provide
strong evidence that our frequency-specific attention-based connectivity measure cap-
tures meaningful and interpretable connectivity patterns that complement traditional
FC analysis. The method does not simply maximize differences between frequencies
but extracts biologically relevant connectivity information specific to each frequency
band.
Appendix D Test-Retest Reliability of
Frequency-Specific Attention Matrices
To assess the temporal stability of our model’s derived biomarkers, we performed a
test-retest reliability analysis on the frequency-specific attention matrices. Due to the
unavailability of UK Biobank test-retest data, we utilized the resting-state fMRI data
from the Human Connectome Project (HCP) dataset, which includes two separate
runs (run 1 and run 2) for each participant, serving as an excellent proxy for evaluating
short-term reliability.
We fine-tuned the MBBN model on a sex classification task using the HCP dataset.
After training, we extracted the subject-level attention matrices for each of the three
frequency bands (high, low, ultralow) from both run 1 and run 2 of the test set. To
evaluate the consistency of these matrices over time, we calculated the Intraclass Cor-
relation Coefficient (ICC), using a two-way mixed-effects model for absolute agreement
(ICC(A,1)). The analysis was conducted separately for male and female subjects to
ensure reliability was not sex-dependent.
The results demonstrated high to excellent test-retest reliability across all condi-
tions. For both male and female participants, the ICC values for the attention matrices
in the high, low, and ultralow frequency bands were all greater than 0.95. This high
level of temporal stability confirms that the frequency-specific connectivity patterns
captured by MBBN are robust and consistent, strengthening their validity as reliable
biomarkers for downstream clinical and cognitive prediction tasks.
Appendix E Confounds Analysis
We assessed whether major potential confounds—age, sex, head motion (mean FD),
and multi-site acquisition—could bias the reported effects in the ABCD cohort. We
(i) compared group characteristics before and after propensity score matching (PSM)
and (ii) tested associations between the learned knee frequencies ( f1,f2) and each
confound.
35E.1 Confound analyses and propensity score matching
(details)
We evaluated whether sex, age, head motion (mean FD), and site (22 acquisition loca-
tions) were associated with the learned knee frequencies ( f1, f2). For sex (binary) and
site (22 levels), factors were entered as categorical predictors; age and mean FD were
modeled as continuous covariates. Linear models and AN(C)OVA were fit with site
as a factor when appropriate. Multiplicity was controlled using false discovery rate
(FDR; Benjamini–Hochberg), and we report adjusted p-values for all tests. To mitigate
residual confounding in downstream classification, we constructed a propensity score–
matched subsample via 1:1 nearest-neighbor matching on sex, age, mean FD, and site
(logistic propensity model; caliper = 0 .2 SD of the logit; no replacement). Covariate
balance was assessed using standardized mean differences (SMD), with |SMD|<0.10
indicating acceptable balance; Love plots and hypothesis tests are provided for refer-
ence. The ADHD classification model was then re-estimated on the matched set, and
performance was compared to the pre-matching baseline using a paired t-test.
E.2 Pre-matching group comparison
Sample sizes before matching were NGroup 0 = 3032 and NGroup 1 = 2334. Group
differences indicated substantial imbalance for motion, sex, and site (Table E3).
Variable Test statistic p-value
Age t=−0.20 p= 0.8418
Mean FD (rsfMRI) t=−11.92 p= 0.0000
Sex χ2= 226 .50 p= 0.0000
Site (22 levels) χ2= 112 .39 p= 0.0000
Table E3 Pre-matching group comparison (ABCD).
E.3 Propensity score matching (PSM) and post-matching
balance
We constructed a matched subsample jointly balancing sex, age, mean FD, and site
(1:1 nearest-neighbor; caliper = 0 .2 SD on the logit; no replacement). Covariate bal-
ance was evaluated via standardized mean differences (SMD) and hypothesis tests
(Table E4); SMD for all matched covariates was <0.10. As enforced by the match-
ing specification, sex and site achieved near-exact balance; age and motion showed no
residual differences.
E.4 Associations between knee frequencies and confounds
We then tested associations between f1/f2and each confound (Table E5). Sex was
associated with f1only (not f2), site effects were present for both knees, whereas age
36Variable Test p-value
Mean FD (rsfMRI) two-sample t-test 0 .9869
Age two-sample t-test 0 .4545
Sex (balanced by design; SMD <0.10) —
Site (22 levels) (balanced by design; SMD <0.10) —
Table E4 Post-matching group comparison (ABCD matched
subsample).
and head motion showed no significant associations. These results suggest a potential
sex-linked physiological contribution at lower frequencies and indicate that age and
motion are unlikely to drive the spectral knees.
Predictor p-value for f1 p-value for f2
Sex (binary) 0 .0001 0 .8641
Age (months) 0 .16564 0 .5921
Mean FD (rsfMRI) 0 .79716 0 .48531
Site (22 levels; ANOVA) 0 .0000 0 .0000
Table E5 Associations of knee frequencies with confounds
(ABCD).
E.5 Remark on downstream analyses
In the matched subsample, ADHD classification performance numerically increased
(AUROC 0 .633→0.651); however, the difference was not statistically significant in
our paired comparison ( p= 0.3742). This indicates that the disorder effect is robust
to demographic, motion, and multi-site factors under stringent covariate balancing.
Appendix F Ablations
F.1 The performance of the model when provided with
timeseries data of a single frequency range.
The core innovation of our model lies in its ability to encode and integrate informa-
tion from distinct frequency bands. To deconstruct the sources of this performance
improvement, we conducted an ablation study to answer two key questions: (1) Is the
simple act of filtering into any single band beneficial compared to using the raw signal?
(2) Is there a synergistic benefit to integrating all three bands simultaneously?
First, we compared models trained on single frequency bands against a model
trained on the unfiltered, Z-scored original signal. As shown in Supplementary
Table F.1, using any single frequency band yielded a notable performance improve-
ment over the original broadband signal. For instance, the model using only the
37ABCD sex classification
Data AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
Z-scored original signal 0.864 [0.851, 0.877] 0.777 [0.759, 0.795]
High Frequency 0.888 [0.866, 0.909] 0.797 [0.763, 0.832]
Low frequency 0.884 [0.870, 0.898] 0.784 [0.751, 0.817]
Ultra-low Frequency 0.870 [0.840, 0.898] 0.779 [0.739, 0.819]
Divided Frequencies 0.916 [0.903, 0.929] 0.844 [0.826, 0.861]
Supplementary Table F6 Results of BERT models trained with single frequency range in the
timeseries data extracted by HCP-MMP1 atlas. Performance is reported as mean [95% Confidence
Interval]
high-frequency band achieved an AUROC of 0.888, surpassing the 0.864 AUROC of
the model using the original signal. This indicates that the process of isolating specific
frequency ranges is beneficial in itself, likely by removing noise and emphasizing more
informative oscillatory patterns.
Second, we analyzed the crucial impact of integrating all three frequency bands
within our multi-view framework. The full model (’Divided Frequencies’) achieved an
AUROC of 0.916, significantly outperforming the best-performing single-band model
(High Frequency, AUROC: 0.888). This result demonstrates a clear synergistic effect,
where the model leverages complementary information from ultralow, low, and high
frequency bands simultaneously. This confirms that the substantial performance gain
of our framework is not merely an artifact of filtering, but a direct result of our multi-
band modeling approach that integrates information across different neural timescales.
F.2 Treating fMRI signal as a sequence of discrete words.
ABCD sex classification
Model AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
MBBN with conv 0.835 [0.813, 0.858] 0.748 [0.745, 0.751]
MBBN without conv 0.916 [0.903, 0.929] 0.844 [0.826, 0.861]
Supplementary Table F7 Results of BERT models with a convolutional layer before BERT
model. Performance is reported as mean [95% Confidence Interval].
Determining whether fMRI data should be treated as continuous variables, akin to
speech, or discrete sequences, similar to natural language, is a critical design choice.
Given the high sample rate of fMRI signals, we hypothesized that they resemble
written sentences more closely than speech signals.
To evaluate this, we introduced convolutional layers before feeding the input into
the model, inspired by speech recognition frameworks such as Wav2Vec [33]. Table F.2
reveals that treating fMRI signals as discrete word sequences yields superior perfor-
mance compared to processing them as continuous variables. This result highlights
38the effectiveness of viewing fMRI signals as structured sequences analogous to natural
language.
F.3 Frequency-dividing strategies.
ABCD sex classification
Dividing Strategy AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
No division 0.864 [0.851, 0.877] 0.777 [0.759, 0.795]
Random 2 Freq 0.903 [0.891, 0.916] 0.818 [0.807, 0.829]
Lorentizan-based 2 Freq 0.903 [0.886, 0.920] 0.805 [0.773, 0.836]
Random 3 Freq 0.900 [0.883, 0.918] 0.803 [0.777, 0.828]
Wavelet & KNN 0.905 [0.886, 0.924] 0.811 [0.747, 0.875]
Canonical 0.911 [0.899, 0.923] 0.808 [0.757, 0.858]
Ours 0.916 [0.903, 0.929] 0.844 [0.826, 0.861]
Supplementary Table F8 Performance comparison of MBBN on the ABCD sex classification
task using different frequency division strategies. Our proposed theory-driven approach (’Ours’) is
compared against baselines with no frequency division, random divisions, a wavelet-based adaptive
method, and conventional fixed canonical bands. Performance is reported as mean [95% Confidence
Interval].
To validate our theory-driven frequency division strategy, we systematically
compared its performance against several alternative approaches. As detailed in Sup-
plementary Table F8, our proposed method (’Ours’) achieved the highest AUROC
(0.916) and Accuracy (0.844) on the ABCD sex classification task.
Notably, our approach outperformed not only baseline models using no frequency
division but also other data-driven techniques, such as a wavelet-based method
(’Wavelet & KNN’). Furthermore, it demonstrated a clear advantage over conven-
tional, literature-based fixed bands (’Canonical’), underscoring the benefit of our
individualized, scale-free approach. This comprehensive comparison confirms that
defining three distinct frequency bands using our Lorentzian and spline-based method
provides a more powerful and informative representation for predicting phenotypes
from fMRI time-series data.
F.4 Sensitivity Analysis of Frequency Band Definitions
To assess the robustness of our model to minor variations in the data-driven fre-
quency cutoffs, we conducted a sensitivity analysis. We systematically perturbed the
empirically derived knee frequencies ( f1andf2) by±5% and ±10% and re-evaluated
the model’s performance on the ABCD sex classification task. The four perturbation
conditions were:
•Wider: The frequency band was widened by shifting f1down by 10% (or 5%) and
f2up by 10% (or 5%).
•Narrower: The band was narrowed by shifting f1up and f2down.
•Shift Up: Both f1andf2were shifted up.
39•Shift Down: Both f1andf2were shifted down.
The results, summarized in Supplementary Table F9, demonstrate that the model’s
performance is highly stable across all conditions. Even with a ±10% perturbation
to the frequency boundaries, the mean AUROC remained within a tight range (0.902
to 0.908), showing no significant degradation compared to the performance with the
original, unperturbed cutoffs. This analysis confirms that our framework is not depen-
dent on the exact precision of the knee frequency detection and is robust to small
variations in the spectral characteristics of the data.
10 percent perturbation 5 percent perturbation
Method AUROC Accuracy AUROC Accuracy
wider 0.908 [0.891, 0.925] 0.809 [0.733, 0.884] 0.904 [0.890, 0.918] 0.798 [0.744, 0.853]
narrower 0.904 [0.881, 0.927] 0.824 [0.803, 0.845] 0.900 [0.886, 0.914] 0.823 [0.792, 0.854]
shift up 0.905 [0.890, 0.919] 0.823 [0.796, 0.850] 0.899 [0.883, 0.916] 0.807 [0.797, 0.817]
shift down 0.902 [0.898, 0.907] 0.811 [0.794, 0.829] 0.901 [0.884, 0.918] 0.823 [0.797, 0.849]
Supplementary Table F9 Sensitivity analysis of frequency cutoffs on the ABCD sex classification
task. The original knee frequencies ( f1, f2) were perturbed by ±5% and ±10% across four conditions.
Performance metrics are reported as mean [95% Confidence Interval] calculated from three random
seeds.
F.5 Test–Retest Stability of Frequency Band Definitions
We estimated the data-driven knee frequencies ( f1,f2) for each subject in the HCP
resting-state fMRI LR runs (run-1 and run-2) using the same pipeline as in the main
analyses. A paired two-sided test found no evidence of run effects ( f1:p= 1.000;f2:
p= 0.9428), supporting short-interval test–retest stability of the knee frequencies.
F.6 Spatial module and temporal module.
ABCD sex classification
Module AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
Spatial 0.553 [0.512, 0.594] 0.540 [0.488, 0.590]
Temporal 0.909 [0.897, 0.922] 0.831 [0.797, 0.865]
Spatiotemporal (MBBN) 0.916 [0.903, 0.929] 0.844 [0.826, 0.861]
Supplementary Table F10 Results of spatial and temporal modules of MBBN in the timeseries
data extracted by HCP-MMP1 atlas. Performance is reported as mean [95% Confidence Interval]
Table F10 illustrates the performance of individual spatial and temporal modules
compared to the full MBBN spatiotemporal architecture on ABCD/UKB sex classi-
fication tasks. The results demonstrate that spatial and temporal modules interact
40synergistically through joint parameter updates during training. When used inde-
pendently, both modules show diminished performance compared to the integrated
spatiotemporal approach (MBBN). The spatial module achieves moderate perfor-
mance, while the temporal module performs considerably worse on the ABCD dataset.
These findings suggest that the neural dynamics captured in fMRI data require both
spatial and temporal processing to maximize predictive power. The superior perfor-
mance of the integrated MBBN architecture implies that allowing these modules to
interact through shared loss functions and simultaneous parameter updates creates
representations that better capture the complex spatiotemporal patterns in brain
activity. This emphasizes the importance of modeling both spatial and temporal
dimensions of neural data rather than treating them as independent components.
F.7 Number of parameters and FLOPs
Module AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑ FLOPsNumber
of Params
Vanilla BERT
(FLOPs-matched)0.886 [0.872, 0.900] 0.807 [0.791, 0.824] 70.489 B 29.894 M
Vanilla BERT
(Params-matched)0.864 [0.851, 0.877] 0.777 [0.759, 0.795] 23.498 B 10.051 M
MBBN 0.916 [0.903, 0.929] 0.844 [0.826, 0.861] 70.528 B 11.141 M
Supplementary Table F11 Performance of vanilla BERT with parameter count or FLOPs
matched to MBBN levels. Experiments were conducted on the ABCD dataset, and the task
was sex classification.
Table F11 demonstrates a fair comparison between MBBN and vanilla BERT
models with matched computational complexity. Two variants of vanilla BERT were
created: one matching MBBN’s FLOPs (70.5B vs 70.5B) and another matching
MBBN’s parameter count (10.1M vs 11.1M). Despite having similar computational
resources or parameter counts, MBBN significantly outperforms both Vanilla BERT
variants in AUROC and accuracy. These results strongly suggest that MBBN’s
superior performance cannot be attributed simply to increased model capacity or com-
putational complexity. Rather, the architectural innovations in MBBN appear to be
responsible for its enhanced effectiveness compared to vanilla BERT baselines.
Appendix G Comparison with other models
G.1 Performance comparison
The tables above present a comparison of various models, atlases, and metrics for
different downstream tasks trained from scratch. In these tables, (CC) refers to
correlation-based connectivity, and (TD) represents temporal dynamics. Specifically,
(CC) denotes Pearson correlation computed on temporal dynamics. Across most tasks,
41ABCD sex classification, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.785 [0.771, 0.799] 0.709 [0.701, 0.717]
BNT (CC) 0.872 [0.856, 0.889] 0.795 [0.773, 0.818]
BolT (TD) 0.886 [0.881, 0.891] 0.795 [0.790, 0.800]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.864 [0.851, 0.877] 0.777 [0.759, 0.795]
MBBN (TD) 0.916 [0.903, 0.929] 0.844 [0.826, 0.861]
Supplementary Table G12 Results of models trained from scratch predicting biological
phenotypes (ABCD sex). Atlas is HCP MMP 1. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity and TD
denotes temporal dynamics.
UKB sex classification, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.859 [0.851, 0.867] 0.768 [0.752, 0.784]
BNT (CC) 0.950 [0.939, 0.961] 0.864 [0.811, 0.917]
BolT (TD) 0.950 [0.949, 0.952] 0.878 [0.876, 0.880]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.942 [0.901, 0.984] 0.876 [0.859, 0.894]
MBBN (TD) 0.980 [0.975, 0.986] 0.921 [0.903, 0.938]
Supplementary Table G13 Results of models trained from scratch predicting biological
phenotypes (UKB sex). Atlas is HCP MMP 1. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity and TD
denotes temporal dynamics.
ABCD sex classification, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.812 [0.800, 0.824] 0.734 [0.726, 0.742]
BNT (CC) 0.920 [0.903, 0.937] 0.839 [0.802, 0.877]
BolT (TD) 0.911 [0.905, 0.917] 0.826 [0.816, 0.837]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.901 [0.879, 0.924] 0.818 [0.767, 0.869]
MBBN (TD) 0.918 [0.913, 0.923] 0.831 [0.805, 0.857]
Supplementary Table G14 Results of models trained from scratch predicting biological
phenotypes (ABCD sex). Atlas is Schaefer 400, 17 Networks. CC denotes correlation-based
connectivity and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
UKB sex classification, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.905 [0.891, 0.919] 0.884 [0.880, 0.888]
BNT (CC) 0.982 [0.980, 0.984] 0.934 [0.929, 0.939]
BolT (TD) 0.982 [0.981, 0.983] 0.932 [0.928, 0.935]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.980 [0.977, 0.983] 0.925 [0.910, 0.940]
MBBN (TD) 0.987 [0.984, 0.990] 0.933 [0.908, 0.959]
Supplementary Table G15 Results of models trained from scratch predicting biological
phenotypes (UKB sex). Atlas is Schaefer 400, 17 Networks. CC denotes correlation-based
connectivity and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
42ABCD depression classification, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.548 [0.468, 0.627] 0.500 [0.500, 0.500]
BNT (CC) 0.546 [0.500, 0.591] 0.847 [0.830, 0.864]
BolT (TD) 0.588 [0.571, 0.605] 0.848 [0.844, 0.853]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.546 [0.500, 0.592] 0.818 [0.661, 0.975]
MBBN (TD) 0.614 [0.554, 0.675] 0.610 [0.578, 0.643]
Supplementary Table G16 Results of models trained from scratch predicting ABCD depression,
atlas is HCP-MMP1. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
UKB depression regression, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) MAE ↓ MSE ↓
XGBOOST (CC) 2.417 [2.341, 2.492] 12.342 [10.211, 13.685]
BNT (CC) 2.276 [2.231, 2.321] 13.989 [11.915, 16.063]
BolT (TD) 2.217 [2.151, 2.285] 12.729 [11.730, 14.189]
vanilla BERT (TD) 2.194 [2.076, 2.311] 12.751 [10.377, 15.124]
MBBN (TD) 2.210 [2.085, 2.334] 13.205 [10.296, 16.115]
Supplementary Table G17 Results of models trained from scratch predicting UKB depression,
atlas is HCP-MMP1. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
ABCD depression classification, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.581 [0.545, 0.617] 0.834 [0.814, 0.854]
BNT (CC) 0.579 [0.525, 0.633] 0.842 [0.812, 0.872]
BolT (TD) 0.585 [0.551, 0.620] 0.844 [0.830, 0.858]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.586 [0.464, 0.708] 0.846 [0.835, 0.857]
MBBN (TD) 0.641 [0.595, 0.687] 0.777 [0.744, 0.810]
Supplementary Table G18 Results of models trained from scratch predicting clinical outcomes
(ABCD depression). Atlas is Schaefer 400, 17 Networks. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity,
and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
MBBN (highlighted in color) generally outperforms or shows comparable performance
to other baseline models.
For instance, in the ABCD depression classification task, the dataset’s imbal-
ance in the depression-HC ratio naturally leads to high regular accuracy. However,
MBBN demonstrates robustness against this imbalance by achieving more balanced
performance metrics compared to other models (Table G24, G25, G26, G27).
Tables G24, G25, G26 and G27 present a comparison across models and metrics
for various fine-tuning tasks. Here, MBBN is compared under different pretraining
strategies:
•MBBN [from scratch]: Trained without pretraining.
43UKB depression regression, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models (data form) MAE ↓ MSE ↓
XGBOOST (CC) 2.408 [2.403, 2.413] 11.966 [11.801, 12.130]
BNT (CC) 2.329 [2.291, 2.366] 15.179 [6.873, 23.485]
BolT (TD) 2.201 [2.189, 2.212] 13.044 [12.127, 13.960]
vanilla BERT (TD) 2.230 [2.213, 2.247] 13.359 [11.903, 14.815]
MBBN (TD) 2.249 [2.234, 2.264] 14.486 [10.432, 16.540]
Supplementary Table G19 Results of models trained from scratch predicting clinical outcomes
(UKB depression). Atlas is Schaefer 400, 17 Networks. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity,
and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
ABCD fluid intelligence regression, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) MAE ↓ MSE ↓
XGBOOST (CC) 0.720 [0.710, 0.729] 0.827 [0.805, 0.849]
BNT (CC) 0.763 [0.710, 0.816] 1.061 [0.810, 1.312]
BolT (TD) 0.728 [0.716, 0.741] 0.845 [0.813, 0.876]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.699 [0.649, 0.748] 0.788 [0.680, 0.897]
MBBN (TD) 0.694 [0.640, 0.748] 0.774 [0.649, 0.899]
Supplementary Table G20 Results of models trained from scratch predicting ABCD fluid
intelligence, atlas is HCPMMP1. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity and TD denotes
temporal dynamics.
UKB fluid intelligence regression, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) MAE ↓ MSE ↓
XGBOOST (CC) 1.609 [1.583, 1.636] 4.078 [3.817, 4.339]
BNT (CC) 1.581 [1.519, 1.644] 3.993 [1.840, 6.146]
BolT (TD) 1.589 [1.583, 1.595] 3.973 [3.955, 3.992]
vanilla BERT (TD) 1.597 [1.550, 1.644] 3.985 [3.666, 4.304]
MBBN (TD) 1.630 [1.611, 1.650] 4.225 [3.845, 4.606]
Supplementary Table G21 Results of models trained from scratch predicting UKB fluid
intelligence, atlas is HCPMMP1. CC denotes correlation-based connectivity and TD denotes
temporal dynamics.
•MBBN [low]: Pretrained with masking loss that targets nodes with low communi-
cability.
•MBBN [random]: Pretrained with random masking loss.
•MBBN [high]: Pretrained with masking loss that targets nodes with high commu-
nicability.
MBBN [high], highlighted in bold text, consistently outperforms or matches the
performance of other baseline models and pretraining strategies across various tasks.
44ABCD fluid intelligence regression, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models (data form) MAE ↓ MSE ↓
XGBOOST (CC) 0.779 [0.665, 0.777] 0.970 [0.938, 1.003]
BNT (CC) 0.781 [0.719, 0.842] 0.845 [0.584, 1.106]
BolT (TD) 0.718 [0.704, 0.731] 0.822 [0.773, 0.871]
vanilla BERT (TD) 0.721 [0.704, 0.731] 0.823 [0.705, 0.941]
MBBN (TD) 0.719 [0.680, 0.757] 0.828 [0.744, 0.913]
Supplementary Table G22 Results of models trained from scratch predicting cognitive
outcomes (ABCD fluid intelligence). Atlas is Schaefer 400, 17 Networks. CC denotes
correlation-based connectivity, and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
UKB fluid intelligence regression, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models (data form) MAE ↓ MSE ↓
XGBOOST (CC) 1.600 [1.592, 1.607] 4.003 [3.928, 4.079]
BNT (CC) 1.552 [1.495, 1.609] 4.459 [-2.013, 10.931]
BolT (TD) 1.576 [1.559, 1.593] 3.919 [3.879, 3.958]
vanilla BERT (TD) 1.585 [1.526, 1.645] 3.985 [3.666, 4.304]
MBBN (TD) 1.628 [1.474, 1.782] 4.205 [3.348, 5.062]
Supplementary Table G23 Results of models trained from scratch predicting cognitive
outcomes (UKB fluid intelligence). Atlas is Schaefer 400, 17 Networks. CC denotes
correlation-based connectivity, and TD denotes temporal dynamics.
This result emphasizes the effectiveness of the high-communicability masking strategy
in enhancing model generalization and fine-tuning performance.
G.2 FLOPs and number of parameters
The parameter count difference between our proposed MBBN model and the base-
line models (Table G28) stems from our architectural design, which processes data
through three separate streams. This design choice was intentional to capture com-
plex patterns through specialized processing pathways. While this results in a higher
parameter count, our ablation studies (Suplementary Materials F.7) demonstrate that
the performance improvements arise primarily from the model’s architecture rather
than simply from increased capacity.
Appendix H Interpretability
In the following tables, two regions involved in connectivity (based on HCP-MMP1)
are presented, along with whether the connectivity shows higher scores in the disorder
group or the healthy control (HC) group. Additionally, corrected p-values and Cohen’s
d scores were rounded to three decimal places. Due to space limitations, only the top
100 connectivity pairs are displayed.
45ABCD ADHD Classification, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.575 [0.559, 0.592] 0.542 [0.529, 0.556]
BNT (CC) 0.620 [0.545, 0.695] 0.593 [0.536, 0.650]
BolT (TD) 0.607 [0.603, 0.612] 0.597 [0.577, 0.614]
Vanilla BERT (TD) 0.606 [0.523, 0.690] 0.594 [0.552, 0.636]
MBBN [from scratch] (TD) 0.633 [0.606, 0.660] 0.593 [0.546, 0.640]
MBBN [random] (TD) 0.603 [0.587, 0.619] 0.589 [0.567, 0.611]
MBBN [low] (TD) 0.615 [0.584, 0.647] 0.602 [0.582, 0.620]
MBBN [high] (TD) 0.645 [0.623, 0.666] 0.601 [0.563, 0.639]
Supplementary Table G24 Finetuning results for ABCD ADHD
classification using pre-trained BERT models with different pretraining losses
(HCP-MMP1 atlas). CC denotes correlation-based connectivity, TD denotes
temporal dynamics, and MBBN represents our proposed model. The [random],
[low], and [high] variants indicate different pretraining strategies based on masking
node communicability. Values in brackets represent the 95% confidence intervals.
ABIDE ASD Classification, HCP MMP1 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.573 [0.442, 0.704] 0.546 [0.407, 0.686]
BNT (CC) 0.691 [0.180, 1.202] 0.617 [0.427, 0.806]
BolT (TD) 0.632 [0.616, 0.648] 0.566 [0.557, 0.576]
Vanilla BERT (TD) 0.644 [0.373, 0.915] 0.625 [0.470, 0.780]
MBBN [from scratch] (TD) 0.780 [0.742, 0.818] 0.657 [0.544, 0.769]
MBBN [random] (TD) 0.601 [0.598, 0.604] 0.534 [0.510, 0.559]
MBBN [low] (TD) 0.583 [0.450, 0.715] 0.547 [0.518, 0.576]
MBBN [high] (TD) 0.810 [0.795, 0.825] 0.717 [0.694, 0.740]
Supplementary Table G25 Finetuning results for ABIDE ASD
classification using pre-trained BERT models with different pretraining losses
(HCP-MMP1 atlas). CC denotes correlation-based connectivity, TD denotes
temporal dynamics, and MBBN represents our proposed model. The [random],
[low], and [high] variants indicate different pretraining strategies based on masking
node communicability. Values in brackets represent the 95% confidence intervals.
46ABCD ADHD Classification, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.594 [0.570, 0.618] 0.564 [0.545, 0.583]
BNT (CC) 0.620 [0.566, 0.674] 0.599 [0.546, 0.653]
BolT (TD) 0.599 [0.570, 0.628] 0.589 [0.556, 0.622]
Vanilla BERT (TD) 0.604 [0.552, 0.656] 0.600 [0.577, 0.623]
MBBN [from scratch] (TD) 0.608 [0.560, 0.656] 0.570 [0.535, 0.606]
MBBN [random] (TD) 0.596 [0.553, 0.638] 0.593 [0.494, 0.691]
MBBN [low] (TD) 0.584 [0.483, 0.684] 0.574 [0.471, 0.678]
MBBN [high] (TD) 0.618 [0.560, 0.677] 0.580 [0.474, 0.685]
Supplementary Table G26 Finetuning results on ABCD ADHD
classification (Schaefer 400 atlas). CC denotes correlation-based connectivity,
TD denotes temporal dynamics, and MBBN represents our proposed model. The
[random], [low], and [high] variants indicate different pretraining strategies based
on masking node communicability.
ABIDE ASD Classification, Schaefer 400 atlas
Models (data form) AUROC ↑ Accuracy ↑
XGBOOST (CC) 0.660 [0.590, 0.730] 0.629 [0.538, 0.720]
BNT (CC) 0.715 [0.579, 0.850] 0.652 [0.416, 0.887]
BolT (TD) 0.608 [0.523, 0.693] 0.578 [0.494, 0.661]
Vanilla BERT (TD) 0.664 [0.213, 1.115] 0.667 [0.487, 0.846]
MBBN [from scratch] (TD) 0.800 [0.595, 1.004] 0.683 [0.407, 0.718]
MBBN [random] (TD) 0.696 [0.538, 0.854] 0.563 [0.294, 0.831]
MBBN [low] (TD) 0.500 [0.346, 0.654] 0.479 [0.300, 0.658]
MBBN [high] (TD) 0.822 [0.765, 0.879] 0.768 [0.731, 0.803]
Supplementary Table G27 Finetuning results on ABIDE ASD
classification (Schaefer 400 atlas). CC denotes correlation-based connectivity,
TD denotes temporal dynamics, and MBBN represents our proposed model. The
[random], [low], and [high] variants indicate different pretraining strategies based
on masking node communicability.
Models (data form) Number of parameters FLOPs
XGBOOST (CC) 6004 400
BNT (CC) 11,678,810 13,084,233,536
BolT (TD) 20,697,661 50,032,700,640
Vanilla BERT (TD) 22,280,137 69,848,980,256
MBBN (TD) 23,370,075 209,581,818,912
Supplementary Table G28 The table shows the number of parameters and FLOPs of baseline
models used in this study and MBBN (our model).
47Supplementary Table H29 : Top connectivity features in high-frequency range of
ABCD ADHD prediction.
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Area OP4-PV R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.564
Primary Motor Cortex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.561
Primary Motor Cortex L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.56
Medial Belt Complex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.559
Area OP1-SII R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.559
Area PF Opercular R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.558
Area 43 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.557
Area a24 R Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.554
Superior Temporal Visual Area R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.554
Area Posterior 24 prime R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.554
Area 1 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.553
PreSubiculum R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.551
Anterior IntraParietal Area R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.55
Area PFt R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.549
Area posterior 24 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.548
Ventral Area 6 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.547
Area 2 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.546
Anterior Ventral Insular Area L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.545
Area PFcm R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.544
Frontal Opercular Area 3 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.543
Ventral IntraParietal Complex L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.541
Area PFm Complex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.536
VentroMedial Visual Area 1 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.536
Area 7PC R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.536
Continued on next page
48Supplementary Table H29 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area V3B R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.535
Area posterior 24 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.535
RetroInsular Cortex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.535
Area TE1 anterior L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.534
Ventral Area 24d R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.534
Area 25 R Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.534
Area p32 prime R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.534
Insular Granular Complex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.534
Area 43 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.531
Area 1 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.53
Area TA2 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.53
Primary Sensory Cortex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.53
Area PGi R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.53
Para-Insular Area L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.529
Frontal Eye Fields L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.529
Area 46 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.528
Area OP2-3-VS R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.527
Area 55b R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.527
Area dorsal 32 R Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.527
VentroMedial Visual Area 2 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.526
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.526
Area dorsal 32 L Area 11l R HC <0.001 0.525
Frontal Opercular Area 2 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.525
Area OP2-3-VS L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.524
Area 10r R Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.524
Area 10v L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.524
Continued on next page
49Supplementary Table H29 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Frontal Opercular Area 4 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.524
Rostral Area 6 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.523
Frontal Opercular Area 1 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.523
Area PF Complex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.522
Area STSv anterior L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.521
Area s32 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.52
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 1 LArea 10v R HC <0.001 0.52
Frontal Opercular Area 4 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.52
Area 13l R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.52
Area 3a R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.519
Area PGi R Primary Motor Cortex R HC <0.001 0.518
Dorsal Area 24d R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.518
Area dorsal 32 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.518
Area Posterior 24 prime L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.518
Medial Belt Complex R Primary Motor Cortex R HC <0.001 0.518
Area posterior 24 R Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.517
Area PF Opercular L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.517
Area IntraParietal 2 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.517
Area 47m R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.517
Area 25 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.517
RetroSplenial Complex R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.516
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 1 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.516
Sixth Visual Area R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.516
Area Frontal Opercular 5 L Area 11l R HC <0.001 0.516
Orbital Frontal Complex L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.515
Continued on next page
50Supplementary Table H29 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
ParaHippocampal Area 3 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.515
Area p32 R Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.514
Area 10d L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.514
Area a24 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.514
Area 43 L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.514
Frontal Opercular Area 3 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Supplementary and Cingulate Eye
Field RArea 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Dorsal area 6 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Area PFt L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Area V6A R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Insular Granular Complex L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Area PFcm L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Anterior 24 prime R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.513
Anterior Ventral Insular Area L Ventral Area 6 L HC <0.001 0.513
ParaHippocampal Area 1 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.512
PeriSylvian Language Area L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.511
RetroSplenial Complex R Area Posterior Insular 1 L HC <0.001 0.511
Area 9-46d R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.511
Area posterior 24 L Area 11l R HC <0.001 0.511
VentroMedial Visual Area 3 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.511
Area 47s L Area 11l R HC <0.001 0.511
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 2 R Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.51
Area TG dorsal L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.51
Area 2 L Area 10v R HC <0.001 0.51
Continued on next page
51Supplementary Table H29 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Supplementary and Cingulate Eye
Field LArea 10v R HC <0.001 0.51
52Supplementary Table H30 : Top connectivity features in low frequency range of
ABCD ADHD prediction
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
PeriSylvian Language Area L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.441
Dorsal Area 24d L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.441
Area 31pd L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.44
Area STSv posterior R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.44
Area STSv posterior R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.439
Dorsal area 6 R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.435
Area TE1 Middle L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.435
Area TE1 anterior R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.434
Area STSd anterior L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.433
Auditory 5 Complex R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.431
Superior Temporal Visual Area L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.43
RetroInsular Cortex L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.429
Area TE1 anterior R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.429
Area STSd posterior L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.428
Area 23d L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.424
Area TG dorsal L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.423
Sixth Visual Area R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.423
PeriSylvian Language Area L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.423
PeriSylvian Language Area L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.422
Entorhinal Cortex R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.422
PeriSylvian Language Area L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.422
Area STSv anterior L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.421
Area s32 L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.421
Area s32 L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.421
Continued on next page
53Supplementary Table H30 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area TE1 Middle L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.42
Area 8Av L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.42
Area STSd anterior R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.418
Area PHT R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.417
VentroMedial Visual Area 3 L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.417
Area V6A L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.417
Area 47l (47 lateral) R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.416
Dorsal area 6 L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.415
Area 8Ad L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.414
Area 8C L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.414
Area TE1 anterior L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.413
Area V6A L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.413
Area TG dorsal L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.413
Auditory 5 Complex L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.412
Area 10d R Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.412
Area 47s R Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.411
Area TE1 Middle L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.411
Area TE1 posterior L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.411
Hippocampus R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.411
Area TE1 Middle L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.41
Area STSd posterior L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.41
Primary Auditory Cortex R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.41
Dorsal Area 24d L Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.41
Area dorsal 32 L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.41
Area TE1 posterior R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.409
Dorsal area 6 R Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.409
Continued on next page
54Supplementary Table H30 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Primary Motor Cortex R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.409
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 1 RFrontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.409
Area TE1 anterior R Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.409
Area TE1 Middle R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.408
Dorsal area 6 R Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.408
Lateral Belt Complex R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.408
Area 31pd L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.408
Superior 6-8 Transitional Area L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.408
Lateral Belt Complex R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.407
Area TG dorsal R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.407
Area 31pd L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.407
Area dorsal 32 L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.407
Area 10d R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.407
Area STSd anterior L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.406
Area 8B Lateral L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.405
Area 31pd R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.405
Area 8Ad L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.405
Pirform Cortex L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.405
Frontal Opercular Area 1 R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.405
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 1 RAuditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.405
Dorsal area 6 R Medial Belt Complex R HC <0.001 0.405
Area 8B Lateral L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.404
Area PGs L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.404
Continued on next page
55Supplementary Table H30 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 1 RArea OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.404
Area 6mp R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.403
Area IFJa R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.403
Area 45 L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.403
Area 31pd R Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.403
Ventral IntraParietal Complex R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.403
Auditory 5 Complex L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.403
Auditory 4 Complex L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.403
Area PFcm R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.403
Area 6 anterior L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.403
Area dorsal 32 L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.403
Area 10d L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.403
Area 9 Posterior L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.402
Middle Temporal Area R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.402
Area 8Ad L Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.402
Area TE1 Middle L Posterior Insular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.401
Area STSd anterior R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.401
Area TG dorsal R Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.401
Area TE1 posterior R Frontal Opercular Area 2 R HC <0.001 0.401
Area 7m R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.401
Entorhinal Cortex R Auditory 4 Complex R HC <0.001 0.401
Area 47l (47 lateral) L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.4
PreCuneus Visual Area L Insular Granular Complex L HC <0.001 0.4
Area STGa R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.4
Superior Temporal Visual Area L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.4
Continued on next page
56Supplementary Table H30 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area TG dorsal L Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.4
Medial Belt Complex R Area OP2-3-VS R HC <0.001 0.399
57Supplementary Table H31 : Top connectivity features in ultralow frequency range
of ABCD ADHD prediction
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Medial Belt Complex R Area PGp R HC <0.001 0.373
Area dorsal 32 R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD <0.001 0.372
Area FST R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD <0.001 0.368
Area dorsal 32 R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD <0.001 0.367
Medial Belt Complex R Seventh Visual Area R HC <0.001 0.363
Area PGi L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD <0.001 0.361
ParaHippocampal Area 3 R Area TF R HC 0.001 0.346
Area 47s R Area PGp R HC 0.001 0.344
Area 8BM R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.001 0.343
Area FST R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.001 0.343
Area 11l L Area PGp R HC 0.001 0.343
Area 8Av R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.001 0.343
Area 11l L Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.001 0.342
Area 47l (47 lateral) L Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.001 0.341
Area PGi L Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.001 0.339
Area 8BM R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.001 0.339
Area FST R Area Posterior Insular 1 L ADHD 0.001 0.338
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 2 LParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.001 0.337
Area 47s R Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.001 0.336
Area OP4-PV R Area PGp R HC 0.001 0.336
Pirform Cortex R Area PGp R HC 0.001 0.336
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.001 0.335
Area dorsal 23 a+b R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.001 0.334
Continued on next page
58Supplementary Table H31 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Fourth Visual Area L Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.001 0.334
Area STSv posterior R Area 47s R ADHD 0.001 0.333
Area Posterior Insular 1 L Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.001 0.33
Area 47s R Seventh Visual Area R HC 0.001 0.33
Area STSv posterior R Polar 10p R ADHD 0.001 0.33
Area 11l L Seventh Visual Area R HC 0.001 0.33
Area OP4-PV R Area TF R HC 0.001 0.329
Medial Belt Complex R Sixth Visual Area L HC 0.001 0.328
Area STSv posterior R Anterior Agranular Insula Complex R ADHD 0.002 0.328
Area STSv posterior R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.328
Area 5L R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.328
Area IFSa R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.327
Medial Belt Complex R Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.002 0.326
Area STGa R Area TF R HC 0.002 0.325
Area 11l L Area 7PC L HC 0.002 0.325
Area V3A L Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.324
Area posterior 9-46v R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.324
Area anterior 9-46v R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.324
Fourth Visual Area R Area 10v L ADHD 0.002 0.323
Medial Belt Complex R Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.002 0.323
Area STSv posterior R Orbital Frontal Complex L ADHD 0.002 0.323
Area PFm Complex L Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.322
Area STSv posterior R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.322
Medial Area 7A R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.321
Medial Belt Complex R Area V3A L HC 0.002 0.32
Area OP4-PV R Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.002 0.32
Continued on next page
59Supplementary Table H31 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Area STSv posterior R Area 10v L ADHD 0.002 0.32
Area 11l L Fourth Visual Area L HC 0.002 0.32
Area STSd posterior L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.319
Area dorsal 32 R Area Posterior 24 prime R ADHD 0.002 0.319
Area dorsal 32 R Hippocampus R ADHD 0.002 0.319
Area Posterior Insular 1 L Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.002 0.318
Area PFm Complex L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.318
Third Visual Area R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.318
Area FST L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.317
Area FST R Pirform Cortex L ADHD 0.002 0.317
Area FST R Area p32 L ADHD 0.002 0.317
Anterior IntraParietal Area L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.316
Area 11l L Ventral IntraParietal Complex L HC 0.002 0.316
Area STSv posterior R Area 47l (47 lateral) R ADHD 0.002 0.316
Area STSd posterior L Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.316
Area ventral 23 a+b R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.315
Area STSv posterior R Pirform Cortex L ADHD 0.002 0.315
Medial Belt Complex R Second Visual Area L HC 0.002 0.315
Area Posterior Insular 1 L Area PGp R HC 0.002 0.315
Area 47l (47 lateral) L Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.002 0.315
Area 8Av R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.314
Pirform Cortex R Seventh Visual Area R HC 0.002 0.314
Sixth Visual Area L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.002 0.314
Area 43 L Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.002 0.313
Area STSv posterior R Area p32 L ADHD 0.002 0.313
Area TG dorsal R Area PGp R HC 0.002 0.313
Continued on next page
60Supplementary Table H31 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Medial Superior Temporal Area L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.312
Area dorsal 32 R Anterior Agranular Insula Complex R ADHD 0.002 0.312
Area p32 R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.312
Area PGi L Hippocampus R ADHD 0.003 0.312
Area STGa L Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.002 0.312
Medial Area 7A R Area OP2-3-VS R ADHD 0.003 0.311
Dorsal area 6 R Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.003 0.311
Area TE1 Middle R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.311
Area p32 L Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.003 0.31
IntraParietal Sulcus Area 1 R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.31
Fusiform Face Complex R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.309
Area 11l L Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.003 0.309
Area 44 R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.309
Area 23c R ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.309
Medial Belt Complex R Area V6A R HC 0.003 0.309
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 1 R Anterior IntraParietal Area L HC 0.003 0.308
Medial Belt Complex R Ventral IntraParietal Complex L HC 0.003 0.308
Dorsal area 6 R Seventh Visual Area R HC 0.003 0.308
Area 47l (47 lateral) L Area PGp R HC 0.003 0.308
Area STSv posterior R Area anterior 10p L ADHD 0.003 0.307
Ventral Area 6 L Medial Superior Temporal Area L HC 0.003 0.306
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 1 RParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.306
Pirform Cortex L Area PGp R HC 0.003 0.306
Area STSv posterior R Area 47s L ADHD 0.003 0.305
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 2 L ParaHippocampal Area 1 R ADHD 0.003 0.305
61Supplementary Table H32 : Top connectivity features in high frequency range of
ABIDE ASD prediction
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area 2 L Area 11l R HC 0.002 2.232
Area PFcm L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.191
RetroInsular Cortex L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.162
Ventral Area 24d L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.162
Area IntraParietal 2 L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.149
Area Posterior 24 prime R Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.147
Area Posterior 24 prime L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.147
Ventral Area 24d R Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.145
Area 1 L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.141
Area 44 R Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.14
Primary Auditory Cortex L Area 11l R HC 0.003 2.127
Area dorsal 32 R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.11
Area Frontal Opercular 5 L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.106
Area anterior 32 prime L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.104
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 2 R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.101
Anterior IntraParietal Area L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.101
Anterior 24 prime R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.099
Area 43 R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.097
Orbital Frontal Complex R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.091
Area OP4-PV R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.09
Area 23d L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.085
Frontal Opercular Area 3 L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.083
Area PGi R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.082
Dorsal Area 24d L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.082
Continued on next page
62Supplementary Table H32 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Primary Sensory Cortex L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.08
Second Visual Area R Sixth Visual Area L ASD 0.004 2.075
Area PFt L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.075
Area 7PC L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.073
Area anterior 32 prime R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.07
Area 33 prime L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.067
Area OP2-3-VS L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.066
Area posterior 10p R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.064
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.064
Area ventral 23 a+b L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.055
Area 23d R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.054
Area 7m R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.053
Area 10v R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.05
Lateral Area 7A L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.05
Area IntraParietal 1 L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.049
Area Frontal Opercular 5 R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.049
Anterior 24 prime L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.049
Area posterior 9-46v L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.046
Area p32 prime R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.046
Area ventral 23 a+b R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.045
Area posterior 24 L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.045
Area dorsal 32 L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.044
PeriSylvian Language Area L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.044
Auditory 4 Complex R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.044
Lateral Belt Complex R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.043
Area 8BM R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.043
Continued on next page
63Supplementary Table H32 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Area PGs L Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.041
Area 10d R Area 11l R HC 0.004 2.04
Fourth Visual Area L Sixth Visual Area L ASD 0.005 2.039
Rostral Area 6 R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.038
Area 33 prime R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.035
Insular Granular Complex L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.034
Ventral Area 6 R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.034
Seventh Visual Area R Sixth Visual Area L ASD 0.005 2.032
Area dorsal 23 a+b L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.027
Orbital Frontal Complex L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.027
Area TE2 anterior L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.027
Medial Belt Complex R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.026
Area 45 R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.025
Medial Area 7P R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.023
Ventral Area 6 L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.021
Dorsal Area 24d R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.02
ProStriate Area L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.02
Area OP1-SII L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.02
Medial IntraParietal Area L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.019
Area anterior 47r R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.018
Superior 6-8 Transitional Area R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.015
Area 8Ad R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.012
Area IFSp L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.012
Superior Temporal Visual Area L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.011
Ventral IntraParietal Complex L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.011
Area p32 prime L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.01
Continued on next page
64Supplementary Table H32 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
PreSubiculum R Sixth Visual Area L ASD 0.005 2.007
Area 8B Lateral R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.005
Area V6A L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.004
Area IFJp L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.004
Area Lateral IntraParietal ventral L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.004
Area 8Av R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.004
Area IFJa L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.004
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 2 L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.003
Frontal Opercular Area 4 L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.003
Area PF Opercular L Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.001
Area posterior 24 R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.001
Area PFm Complex R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.0
Area 5L R Area 11l R HC 0.005 2.0
Area 10v L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.998
Area 5m ventral L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.998
Anterior Ventral Insular Area L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.996
Area posterior 9-46v R Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.994
Area PGp L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.992
Frontal Opercular Area 2 L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.991
Area PFm Complex L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.99
Area Lateral IntraParietal dorsal L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.988
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 1 L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.988
Area 31p ventral L Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.987
Area V6A R Area 11l R HC 0.005 1.987
65Supplementary Table H33 : Top connectivity features in low frequency range of
ABIDE ASD prediction
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Frontal Opercular Area 3 L Polar 10p R HC 0.003 2.128
Frontal Opercular Area 2 L Polar 10p R HC 0.003 2.123
Area V3A R Polar 10p R HC 0.003 2.117
Area posterior 47r L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.109
IntraParietal Sulcus Area 1 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.101
Area OP2-3-VS R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.1
Frontal Opercular Area 3 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.096
Frontal Opercular Area 2 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.095
Area 44 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.093
Para-Insular Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.093
Eighth Visual Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.091
Ventral IntraParietal Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.09
Area IFSp L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.087
Area anterior 9-46v L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.083
Area STGa R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.082
Medial IntraParietal Area L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.078
ParaHippocampal Area 1 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.075
Rostral Area 6 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.074
Area V3B L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.074
Pirform Cortex L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.074
Anterior 24 prime L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.073
Para-Insular Area L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.072
Area TF R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.071
Primary Auditory Cortex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.071
Continued on next page
66Supplementary Table H33 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area PFt R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.069
Area V4t L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.069
Area OP1-SII R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.069
Area V3B R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.069
Pirform Cortex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.068
Area IntraParietal 0 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.067
Area Frontal Opercular 5 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.064
Frontal Opercular Area 1 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.064
Area 55b L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.064
Area OP2-3-VS L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.064
ProStriate Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.063
Area STSd posterior L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.062
Area IntraParietal 0 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.062
Area 8B Lateral L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.061
Area STSd anterior L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.061
Lateral Belt Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.061
Lateral Area 7P L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.061
IntraParietal Sulcus Area 1 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.06
Area OP1-SII L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.06
Area 2 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.059
Area IFJa R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.059
Ventral IntraParietal Complex L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.058
Area Posterior Insular 1 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.058
Area 7PC R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.058
Area IFJp R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.057
Insular Granular Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.057
Continued on next page
67Supplementary Table H33 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area IFSa L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.057
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.056
Posterior Insular Area 2 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.055
Area 33 prime R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.055
Frontal Opercular Area 4 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.054
Area Lateral IntraParietal ventral R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.053
Area 8BM L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.053
Ventral Visual Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.053
Middle Insular Area L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.053
Area 9 Middle R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.052
Insular Granular Complex L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.051
Sixth Visual Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.051
Lateral Area 7A R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.051
Ventral Visual Complex L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.05
Area TG dorsal R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.05
Frontal Opercular Area 4 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.05
Anterior IntraParietal Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.05
Hippocampus R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.05
PreSubiculum L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.05
Area anterior 10p L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.048
Area IFJp L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.047
Seventh Visual Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.047
VentroMedial Visual Area 2 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.046
Eighth Visual Area L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.045
Area TA2 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.044
Fourth Visual Area R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.044
Continued on next page
68Supplementary Table H33 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area PFcm R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.044
Area PFm Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.044
Area PFm Complex L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.044
Area TE1 anterior R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.043
Posterior Insular Area 2 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.043
Area 8Ad L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.043
Area dorsal 32 R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.042
Area V4t R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.042
Frontal Eye Fields L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.041
Posterior InferoTemporal complex L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.041
Area Lateral IntraParietal dorsal R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.041
Area PF Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.04
Area 9 Middle L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.04
Area STSd anterior R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.04
Area 43 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.04
VentroMedial Visual Area 3 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.04
Area 8Av L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.039
Area 6mp L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.039
Area TE2 anterior R Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.039
Area 1 L Polar 10p R HC 0.004 2.037
Area V6A L Polar 10p R HC 0.005 2.037
ParaBelt Complex R Polar 10p R HC 0.005 2.037
Area 44 R Polar 10p R HC 0.005 2.036
VentroMedial Visual Area 3 R Polar 10p R HC 0.005 2.036
69Supplementary Table H34 : Top connectivity features in ultralow frequency range
of ABIDE ASD prediction
Region 1 Region 2 Disorder/HC Corrected p-value Cohen’s d
Area PHT L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 5.637
Area 9 Posterior R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 5.334
Area 8Ad R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.99
Area 8B Lateral L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.835
Orbital Frontal Complex L Area TF R ASD <0.001 3.767
Superior Frontal Language Area L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.566
Superior 6-8 Transitional Area L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.566
Area TE2 posterior L Area Posterior 24 prime R ASD <0.001 3.549
RetroInsular Cortex R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 3.54
Frontal Opercular Area 2 L Ventral IntraParietal Complex R ASD <0.001 3.499
Fourth Visual Area L Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 3.494
Lateral Area 7A R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.38
Frontal Eye Fields L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.355
Area V3B R Area 9-46d L ASD 0.002 3.339
Medial Area 7P L Area anterior 32 prime L ASD 0.002 3.328
Fourth Visual Area L Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.002 3.295
Continued on next page
70Supplementary Table H34 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Sixth Visual Area R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.252
Area posterior 9-46v R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 3.201
Second Visual Area R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.176
Area 8BM R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.173
Area STSd posterior L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 3.169
Second Visual Area R Area 23d R ASD <0.001 3.143
IntraParietal Sulcus Area 1 R Area 23d R ASD <0.001 3.128
Lateral Area 7P L RetroInsular Cortex L ASD <0.001 3.08
Lateral Area 7P R RetroInsular Cortex L ASD <0.001 3.076
Medial Area 7P L Primary Sensory Cortex R ASD <0.001 3.064
Second Visual Area L Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 3.024
Second Visual Area L Area PFm Complex L ASD <0.001 3.012
Area posterior 9-46v L RetroInsular Cortex L ASD <0.001 3.009
Area TE2 posterior L Area 5m R ASD <0.001 2.983
Area 5m L Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.966
Area PH L Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.963
Area 2 R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.962
Area V3B R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.95
Area 9 Middle L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.928
Area 31a R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.921
Continued on next page
71Supplementary Table H34 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Perirhinal Ectorhinal Cortex R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.919
Area 6m anterior R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.913
Area PH L Area PFm Complex L ASD <0.001 2.878
Ventral Area 6 R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.867
Parieto-Occipital Sulcus Area 1 L Medial Superior Temporal Area R ASD <0.001 2.859
Ventral Visual Complex R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.859
Area anterior 32 prime R Area 23d R ASD <0.001 2.844
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 RArea anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.838
ParaHippocampal Area 2 R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.821
Area 9-46d R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.82
Area V3B R Area Posterior 24 prime R ASD <0.001 2.801
Area PHT L Area dorsal 23 a+b L ASD <0.001 2.801
Area 47m L Area Lateral Occipital 1 L ASD <0.001 2.796
Ventral IntraParietal Complex L Medial Superior Temporal Area L ASD <0.001 2.796
Area IntraParietal 2 R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD <0.001 2.789
Area STSv posterior L Area 23d R ASD 0.007 2.781
VentroMedial Visual Area 1 L Primary Sensory Cortex R ASD <0.001 2.775
Area posterior 24 L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD <0.001 2.774
Medial Area 7A R Primary Sensory Cortex R ASD <0.001 2.767
Primary Motor Cortex R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD 0.001 2.762
Continued on next page
72Supplementary Table H34 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Medial Area 7A L Primary Sensory Cortex R ASD 0.001 2.753
Medial Area 7P L Area PFm Complex L ASD <0.001 2.751
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area L Medial Superior Temporal Area R ASD 0.001 2.744
Area Lateral Occipital 2 R RetroInsular Cortex L ASD 0.001 2.736
Area Lateral Occipital 2 R Medial Superior Temporal Area R ASD 0.001 2.734
Area dorsal 32 L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.723
Area TG Ventral L RetroInsular Cortex L ASD 0.001 2.711
Area Lateral IntraParietal dorsal R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD 0.001 2.696
Primary Visual Cortex R Area 23d R ASD 0.001 2.688
Area p32 R Medial Superior Temporal Area R ASD 0.005 2.685
Area STSv posterior L Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.005 2.683
Area PFt R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.681
Area 31a R Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.001 2.672
Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 RArea PFm Complex L ASD 0.001 2.669
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.658
Frontal Opercular Area 3 L Area 8Av L ASD 0.001 2.645
Anterior IntraParietal Area R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD 0.001 2.627
Dorsal Transitional Visual Area R Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.001 2.62
Posterior Insular Area 2 R Area anterior 32 prime L ASD 0.001 2.618
Primary Visual Cortex L Area 23d R ASD 0.001 2.615
Medial Area 7A L Area anterior 32 prime L ASD 0.001 2.608
Primary Visual Cortex L Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.001 2.606
Continued on next page
73Supplementary Table H34 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Area 8Av L Primary Sensory Cortex R ASD 0.001 2.599
Area TE2 posterior L RetroInsular Cortex L ASD 0.001 2.583
Area Lateral Occipital 2 R Area dorsal 23 a+b L ASD 0.001 2.58
RetroInsular Cortex R Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.001 2.578
Area 1 R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.576
Primary Sensory Cortex R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.572
Area STSv anterior L Area 6 anterior L ASD 0.001 2.57
Area V3B R Medial Belt Complex L ASD 0.001 2.568
Seventh Visual Area L Medial Superior Temporal Area L ASD 0.003 2.565
Area V3A R Ventral IntraParietal Complex R ASD 0.001 2.565
Area STGa L Area 23d R ASD 0.001 2.558
Area 2 L Ventral IntraParietal Complex R ASD 0.001 2.55
Para-Insular Area R Area 23d R ASD 0.001 2.548
Inferior 6-8 Transitional Area L RetroInsular Cortex L ASD 0.001 2.548
Seventh Visual Area L Area PFm Complex L ASD 0.001 2.546
Dorsal area 6 R Area 9-46d L ASD 0.001 2.541
Area 8BM L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.536
Area TE2 posterior L Area Posterior 24 prime L ASD 0.001 2.535
Area 52 L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.533
Area dorsal 32 R Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.532
Ventral Area 6 R Area 23d R ASD 0.001 2.53
Continued on next page
74Supplementary Table H34 – continued from previous page
Region 1 Region 2 Corrected p-value Disorder/HC Cohen’s d
Area 9 Posterior L Area TemporoParietoOccipital Junc-
tion 3 LASD 0.001 2.53
75References
[1] Taghia, J., Cai, W., Ryali, S., Kochalka, J., Nicholas, J., Chen, T., Menon, V.:
Uncovering hidden brain state dynamics that regulate performance and decision-
making during cognition. Nature communications 9(1), 2505 (2018)
[2] He, B.J., Zempel, J.M., Snyder, A.Z., Raichle, M.E.: The temporal structures and
functional significance of scale-free brain activity. Neuron 66(3), 353–369 (2010)
[3] Sendi, M.S., Fu, Z., Harnett, N.G., Rooij, S.J., Vergara, V., Pizzagalli, D.A.,
Daskalakis, N.P., House, S.L., Beaudoin, F.L., An, X., et al.: Brain dynamics
reflecting an intra-network brain state are associated with increased post-
traumatic stress symptoms in the early aftermath of trauma. Nature Mental
Health, 1–14 (2025)
[4] Breakspear, M.: Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nature neuro-
science 20(3), 340–352 (2017)
[5] Kan, X., Dai, W., Cui, H., Zhang, Z., Guo, Y., Yang, C.: Brain network trans-
former. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 25586–25599
(2022)
[6] Bedel, H.A., Sivgin, I., Dalmaz, O., Dar, S.U., C ¸ukur, T.: Bolt: Fused window
transformers for fmri time series analysis. Medical image analysis 88, 102841
(2023)
[7] Wang, C., Subramaniam, V., Yaari, A.U., Kreiman, G., Katz, B., Cases, I., Barbu,
A.: Brainbert: Self-supervised representation learning for intracranial recordings.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14367 (2023)
[8] Ortega Caro, J., Oliveira Fonseca, A.H., Averill, C., Rizvi, S.A., Rosati, M., Cross,
J.L., Mittal, P., Zappala, E., Levine, D., Dhodapkar, R.M., et al.: Brainlm: A
foundation model for brain activity recordings. bioRxiv, 2023–09 (2023)
[9] Stanley, H.E., Meakin, P.: Multifractal phenomena in physics and chemistry.
Nature 335(6189), 405–409 (1988)
[10] Falconer, K.: Fractal Geometry: Mathematical Foundations and Applications, 3rd
edn. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK (2013)
[11] Salat, H., Murcio, R., Arcaute, E.: Multifractal methodology. Physica A: Statis-
tical Mechanics and its Applications 473, 467–487 (2017)
[12] Guidolin, D., Tortorella, C., De Caro, R., Agnati, L.F.: In: Di Ieva, A. (ed.) A
Self-Similarity Logic May Shape the Organization of the Nervous System, pp.
203–225. Springer, Cham (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47606-8 10
.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47606-8 10
76[13] Ciuciu, P., Abry, P., Rabrait, C., Wendt, H.: Log wavelet leaders cumulant based
multifractal analysis of evi fmri time series: evidence of scaling in ongoing and
evoked brain activity. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 2(6),
929–943 (2008)
[14] Smit, D.J., Geus, E.J., Nieuwenhuijzen, M.E., Beijsterveldt, C.E., Baal, G.C.M.,
Mansvelder, H.D., Boomsma, D.I., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K.: Scale-free modula-
tion of resting-state neuronal oscillations reflects prolonged brain maturation in
humans. Journal of Neuroscience 31(37), 13128–13136 (2011)
[15] Tagliazucchi, E., Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., Jahnke, K., Laufs,
H.: Breakdown of long-range temporal dependence in default mode and attention
networks during deep sleep. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
110(38), 15419–15424 (2013)
[16] Tolkunov, D., Rubin, D., Mujica-Parodi, L.R.: Power spectrum scale invariance
quantifies limbic dysregulation in trait anxious adults using fmri: adapting meth-
ods optimized for characterizing autonomic dysregulation to neural dynamic time
series. Neuroimage 50(1), 72–80 (2010)
[17] Maxim, V., S ¸endur, L., Fadili, J., Suckling, J., Gould, R., Howard, R., Bullmore,
E.: Fractional gaussian noise, functional mri and alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage
25(1), 141–158 (2005)
[18] Achard, S., Salvador, R., Whitcher, B., Suckling, J., Bullmore, E.: A resilient,
low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected
association cortical hubs. Journal of Neuroscience 26(1), 63–72 (2006)
[19] Sasai, S., Koike, T., Sugawara, S.K., Hamano, Y.H., Sumiya, M., Okazaki, S.,
Takahashi, H.K., Taga, G., Sadato, N.: Frequency-specific task modulation of
human brain functional networks: A fast fmri study. NeuroImage 224, 117375
(2021)
[20] Hagler Jr, D.J., Hatton, S., Cornejo, M.D., Makowski, C., Fair, D.A., Dick, A.S.,
Sutherland, M.T., Casey, B., Barch, D.M., Harms, M.P., et al. : Image process-
ing and analysis methods for the adolescent brain cognitive development study.
Neuroimage 202, 116091 (2019)
[21] Marek, S., Tervo-Clemmens, B., Calabro, F.J., Montez, D.F., Kay, B.P., Hatoum,
A.S., Donohue, M.R., Foran, W., Miller, R.L., Hendrickson, T.J., et al. : Repro-
ducible brain-wide association studies require thousands of individuals. Nature
603(7902), 654–660 (2022)
[22] Ingalhalikar, M., Shinde, S., Karmarkar, A., Rajan, A., Rangaprakash, D., Desh-
pande, G.: Functional connectivity-based prediction of autism on site harmonized
abide dataset. IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering 68(12), 3628–3637
(2021)
77[23] Esteban, O., Markiewicz, C.J., Blair, R.W., Moodie, C.A., Isik, A.I., Erramuzpe,
A., Kent, J.D., Goncalves, M., DuPre, E., Snyder, M., et al. : fmriprep: a robust
preprocessing pipeline for functional mri. Nature methods 16(1), 111–116 (2019)
[24] Behzadi, Y., Restom, K., Liau, J., Liu, T.T.: A component based noise correction
method (compcor) for bold and perfusion based fmri. Neuroimage 37(1), 90–101
(2007)
[25] Glasser, M.F., Coalson, T.S., Robinson, E.C., Hacker, C.D., Harwell, J., Yacoub,
E., Ugurbil, K., Andersson, J., Beckmann, C.F., Jenkinson, M., et al. : A multi-
modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature 536(7615), 171–178 (2016)
[26] Schaefer, A., Kong, R., Gordon, E.M., Laumann, T.O., Zuo, X.-N., Holmes, A.J.,
Eickhoff, S.B., Yeo, B.T.: Local-global parcellation of the human cerebral cor-
tex from intrinsic functional connectivity mri. Cerebral cortex 28(9), 3095–3114
(2018)
[27] Cordova, M.M., Antovich, D.M., Ryabinin, P., Neighbor, C., Mooney, M.A.,
Dieckmann, N.F., Miranda-Dominguez, O., Nagel, B.J., Fair, D.A., Nigg,
J.T.: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: restricted phenotypes prevalence,
comorbidity, and polygenic risk sensitivity in the abcd baseline cohort. Journal
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 61(10), 1273–1284
(2022)
[28] Martin, C.H., Peng, T., Mahoney, M.W.: Predicting trends in the quality of state-
of-the-art neural networks without access to training or testing data. Nature
Communications 12(1), 4122 (2021)
[29] Zuo, X.-N., Di Martino, A., Kelly, C., Shehzad, Z.E., Gee, D.G., Klein, D.F.,
Castellanos, F.X., Biswal, B.B., Milham, M.P.: The oscillating brain: complex
and reliable. Neuroimage 49(2), 1432–1445 (2010)
[30] Coifman, R.R., Wickerhauser, M.V.: Entropy-based algorithms for best basis
selection. IEEE Transactions on information theory 38(2), 713–718 (1992)
[31] Shim, W.H., Baek, K., Kim, J.K., Chae, Y., Suh, J.-Y., Rosen, B.R., Jeong,
J., Kim, Y.R.: Frequency distribution of causal connectivity in rat sensorimotor
network: resting-state fmri analyses. Journal of Neurophysiology 109(1), 238–248
(2013)
[32] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805 (2018)
[33] Baevski, A., Zhou, Y., Mohamed, A., Auli, M.: wav2vec 2.0: A framework for
self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in neural information
processing systems 33, 12449–12460 (2020)
78[34] Mohanty, R., Sethares, W.A., Nair, V.A., Prabhakaran, V.: Rethinking measures
of functional connectivity via feature extraction. Scientific reports 10(1), 1298
(2020)
[35] Vaswani, A.: Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (2017)
[36] Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D.:
Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
tion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 618–626 (2017)
[37] Cohen, J.: Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edn.
routledge, New York, NY (2013)
[38] Chen, T., He, T., Benesty, M., Khotilovich, V., Tang, Y., Cho, H., Chen, K.,
Mitchell, R., Cano, I., Zhou, T., et al. : Xgboost: extreme gradient boosting. R
package version 0.4-2 1(4), 1–4 (2015)
[39] Kucewicz, M.T., Cimbalnik, J., Garcia-Salinas, J.S., Brazdil, M., Worrell, G.A.:
High frequency oscillations in human memory and cognition: a neurophysiological
substrate of engrams? Brain 147(9), 2966–2982 (2024)
[40] Costa, G.N., Schaum, M., Duarte, J.V., Martins, R., Duarte, I.C., Castelhano,
J., Wibral, M., Castelo-Branco, M.: Distinct oscillatory patterns differentiate
between segregation and integration processes in perceptual grouping. Human
Brain Mapping 45(12), 26779 (2024)
[41] Estrada, E., Hatano, N.: Communicability in complex networks. Physical Review
E77(3), 036111 (2008)
[42] Estrada, E., Hatano, N., Benzi, M.: The physics of communicability in complex
networks. Physics reports 514(3), 89–119 (2012)
[43] Bullmore, E., Long, C., Suckling, J., Fadili, J., Calvert, G., Zelaya, F., Carpenter,
T.A., Brammer, M.: Colored noise and computational inference in neurophys-
iological (fmri) time series analysis: resampling methods in time and wavelet
domains. Human brain mapping 12(2), 61–78 (2001)
[44] Fox, M.D., Raichle, M.E.: Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed
with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nature reviews neuroscience 8(9),
700–711 (2007)
[45] He, B.J.: Scale-free properties of the functional magnetic resonance imaging signal
during rest and task. Journal of Neuroscience 31(39), 13786–13795 (2011)
[46] Mandelbrot, B.B., Van Ness, J.W.: Fractional brownian motions, fractional noises
79and applications. SIAM review 10(4), 422–437 (1968)
[47] Eke, A., Herman, P., Kocsis, L., Kozak, L.: Fractal characterization of complexity
in temporal physiological signals. Physiological measurement 23(1), 1 (2002)
[48] Radulescu, A.R., Rubin, D., Strey, H.H., Mujica-Parodi, L.R.: Power spectrum
scale invariance identifies prefrontal dysregulation in paranoid schizophrenia.
Human brain mapping 33(7), 1582–1593 (2012)
[49] Cha, J., DeDora, D., Nedic, S., Ide, J., Greenberg, T., Hajcak, G., Mujica-
Parodi, L.R.: Clinically anxious individuals show disrupted feedback between
inferior frontal gyrus and prefrontal-limbic control circuit. Journal of Neuroscience
36(17), 4708–4718 (2016)
[50] Tu, W., Liao, Q., Zhou, S., Peng, X., Ma, C., Liu, Z., Liu, X., Cai, Z., He, K.:
Rare: Robust masked graph autoencoder. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering (2023)
[51] Liu, C., Wang, Y., Zhan, Y., Ma, X., Tao, D., Wu, J., Hu, W.: Where to
mask: Structure-guided masking for graph masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.15806 (2024)
[52] Harush, U., Barzel, B.: Dynamic patterns of information flow in complex
networks. Nature communications 8(1), 2181 (2017)
[53] Burgess, P.W., Wu, H.: Rostral prefrontal cortex (brodmann area 10). Principles
of frontal lobe function, 524–544 (2013)
[54] Roth, R.M., Saykin, A.J.: Executive dysfunction in attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: cognitive and neuroimaging findings. Psychiatric
Clinics 27(1), 83–96 (2004)
[55] Baker, C.M., Burks, J.D., Briggs, R.G., Conner, A.K., Glenn, C.A., Robbins,
J.M., Sheets, J.R., Sali, G., McCoy, T.M., Battiste, J.D., et al. : A connec-
tomic atlas of the human cerebrum—chapter 5: The insula and opercular cortex.
Operative Neurosurgery 15(suppl 1), 175–244 (2018)
[56] Peterson, D., Reddy, V., Hamel, R.: Neuroanatomy, auditory pathway. StatPearls.
StatPearls Publishing Copyright (2023)
[57] Ito, T., Tiede, M., Ostry, D.J.: Somatosensory function in speech perception.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(4), 1245–1248 (2009)
[58] Conant, D., Bouchard, K.E., Chang, E.F.: Speech map in the human ventral
sensory-motor cortex. Current opinion in neurobiology 24, 63–67 (2014)
[59] LaFlamme, E.M., Waguespack, H.F., Forcelli, P.A., Malkova, L.: The parahip-
pocampal cortex and its functional connection with the hippocampus are
80critical for nonnavigational spatial memory in macaques. Cerebral Cortex 31(4),
2251–2267 (2021)
[60] Bohbot, V.D., Kalina, M., Stepankova, K., Spackova, N., Petrides, M., Nadel, L.:
Spatial memory deficits in patients with lesions to the right hippocampus and to
the right parahippocampal cortex. Neuropsychologia 36(11), 1217–1238 (1998)
[61] Skodzik, T., Holling, H., Pedersen, A.: Long-term memory performance in adult
adhd: A meta-analysis. Journal of attention disorders 21(4), 267–283 (2017)
[62] Steinberg, E.A., Drabick, D.A.: A developmental psychopathology perspective on
adhd and comorbid conditions: The role of emotion regulation. Child Psychiatry
& Human Development 46, 951–966 (2015)
[63] Bunford, N., Evans, S.W., Wymbs, F.: Adhd and emotion dysregulation among
children and adolescents. Clinical child and family psychology review 18, 185–217
(2015)
[64] Rolls, E.T., Cheng, W., Feng, J.: The orbitofrontal cortex: reward, emotion and
depression. Brain communications 2(2), 196 (2020)
[65] Case-Smith, J., Weaver, L.L., Fristad, M.A.: A systematic review of sensory pro-
cessing interventions for children with autism spectrum disorders. Autism 19(2),
133–148 (2015)
[66] Cibralic, S., Kohlhoff, J., Wallace, N., McMahon, C., Eapen, V.: A systematic
review of emotion regulation in children with autism spectrum disorder. Research
in Autism Spectrum Disorders 68, 101422 (2019)
[67] Velikonja, T., Fett, A.-K., Velthorst, E.: Patterns of nonsocial and social cognitive
functioning in adults with autism spectrum disorder: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. JAMA psychiatry 76(2), 135–151 (2019)
[68] Baker, C.M., Burks, J.D., Briggs, R.G., Conner, A.K., Glenn, C.A., Morgan, J.P.,
Stafford, J., Sali, G., McCoy, T.M., Battiste, J.D., et al. : A connectomic atlas of
the human cerebrum—chapter 2: The lateral frontal lobe. Operative Neurosurgery
15(suppl 1), 10–74 (2018)
[69] Law, C.-K., Kolling, N., Chan, C.C., Chau, B.K.: Frontopolar cortex represents
complex features and decision value during choice between environments. Cell
reports 42(6) (2023)
[70] Ferrucci, L., Ceccarelli, F., Londei, F., Arena, G., Elyasizad, L., Nougaret,
S., Genovesio, A.: Reward monitoring in the frontopolar cortex of macaques.
Scientific Reports 15(1), 1–14 (2025)
[71] Pol´ onyiov´ a, K., Kruyt, J., Ostatn´ ıkov´ a, D.: To the roots of theory of mind deficits
81in autism spectrum disorder: a narrative review. Review Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 1–5 (2024)
[72] De Benedictis, A., Duffau, H., Paradiso, B., Grandi, E., Balbi, S., Granieri, E.,
Colarusso, E., Chioffi, F., Marras, C.E., Sarubbo, S.: Anatomo-functional study of
the temporo-parieto-occipital region: dissection, tractographic and brain mapping
evidence from a neurosurgical perspective. Journal of anatomy 225(2), 132–151
(2014)
[73] Seghatol-Eslami, V.C., Maximo, J.O., Ammons, C.J., Libero, L.E., Kana, R.K.:
Hyperconnectivity of social brain networks in autism during action-intention
judgment. Neuropsychologia 137, 107303 (2020)
[74] Supekar, K., Uddin, L.Q., Khouzam, A., Phillips, J., Gaillard, W.D., Kenworthy,
L.E., Yerys, B.E., Vaidya, C.J., Menon, V.: Brain hyperconnectivity in children
with autism and its links to social deficits. Cell reports 5(3), 738–747 (2013)
[75] Chita-Tegmark, M.: Social attention in asd: A review and meta-analysis of eye-
tracking studies. Research in developmental disabilities 48, 79–93 (2016)
[76] Grinsztajn, L., Oyallon, E., Varoquaux, G.: Why do tree-based models still out-
perform deep learning on typical tabular data? Advances in neural information
processing systems 35, 507–520 (2022)
[77] Kajimura, S., Margulies, D., Smallwood, J.: Frequency-specific brain network
architecture in resting-state fmri. Scientific Reports 13(1), 2964 (2023)
82